THE 


EMOTION 
MACHINE 


Commonsense Thinking, 
Artificial Intelligence, and the 
Future of the Human Mind 


MARVIN MINSKY 


i 


Simon & Schuster 
New York London Toronto Sydney 



4 
4 
SIMON & SCHUSTER 
Rockefeller Center 
1230 Avenue of the Americas 


New York, NY 10020 
Copyright © 2006 by Marvin Minsky 

All tights reserved, including the right of 
reproduction in whole or in part in any form. 

SIMON & SCHUSTER and colophon are registered trademarks 
of Simon & Schuster, Inc. 

Verse on page 298 reprinted courtesy of Theodore Melnechuk 

For information regarding special discounts for bulk purchases, 
please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales: 
1-800-456-6798 or business@simonandschus.ter.com. 

Designed by Nancy Singer Olaguera 

Manufactured in the United States of America 
10 987654321 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Minsky, Marvin Lee. 
The emotion machine : commonsense thinking, 
artificial intelligence, and the future of the human 
mind / Marvin Minsky. 

p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index. 
1. Human information processing. 2. Emotions and cognition. I. Title. 
BF444.M56 2006 
153—dc22 2006044367 

ISBN-13: 978-0-7432-7663-4 
LSBN-10: 0-7432-7663-9 


To 

Gloria, Margaret, Henry, and Juliana 

Collaborators 

Push Singh 
Seymour Papert 
John McCarthy 
Oliver Selfridge 
R. J. Solomonoff 

Imprinters 

Andrew M. Gleason 
George A. Miller 
J. C. R. Licklider 
Solomon Lefschetz 
Warren S. McCulloch 
Claude E. Shannon 


Supporters 

Jeffrey Epstein 
Kazuhiko Nishi 
Nicholas Negroponte 
Harvard Society of Fellows 
Office of Naval Research 
Toshiba Corporation 



CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 1 
1 FALLING IN LOVE 9 
2 ATTACHMENTS AND GOALS 36 
3 FROM PAIN TO SUFFERING 66 
4 CONSCIOUSNESS 94 
5 LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 129 
6 COMMON SENSE 162 
7 THINKING 215 
8 RESOURCEFULNESS 254 
9 THE SELF 298 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 347 
NOTES 351 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 361 
INDEX 373 


THE 

EMOTION 


MACHINE 



INTRODUCTION 


Nora Joyce, to her husband James; 
"Why don't you write books people can read?" 


I hope this book will be useful to everyone who seeks ideas about bow 
human minds might work, or who wants suggestions about better ways to 
drink, or who aims toward building smarter machines. It should be useful 
to readers who want to learn about the field of Artificial Intelligence. 
It should also be of interest to psychologists, neurologists, computer scientists, 
and philosophers because it develops many new ideas about the 
subjects those specialists struggle with. 

We all admire great accomplishments in the sciences, arts, and humanities—
but we rarely acknowledge how much we achieve in the course of 
our everyday lives. We recognize the things we see, we understand the 
words we hear, and we remember things that we've experienced so that, 
later, we can apply what we've learned to other kinds of problems and 
opportunities. 

We also do a remarkable thing that no other creatures seem able to 
do: whenever our usual ways to think fail, we can start to think about 
our thoughts themselves—and if this "reflective thinking" shows where we 
went wrong, that can help us to invent new and more powerful ways to 
think. However, we still know very little about how our brains manage 
to do such things. How does imagination work? What are the causes of 
consciousness? What are emotions, feelings, and thoughts? How do we 
manage to think at all? 

Contrast this with the progress we've seen toward answering questions 
about physical things. What are solids, liquids, and gases? What are 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

colors, sounds, and temperatures? What are forces, stresses, and strains? 
What is the nature of energy? Today, almost all such mysteries have been 
explained in terms of very small numbers of simple laws-—for example, 
the equations discovered by such physicists as Newton, Maxwell, Einstein, 
and Schrodinger. 

So naturally, psychologists tried to imitate physicists—by searching 
for compact sets of laws to explain what happens inside our brains. However, 
no such simple set of laws exists, because every brain has hundreds of 
parts, each of which evolved to do certain particular kinds ol jobs; some 
of them recognize situations, others tell muscles to execute actions, others 
formulate goals and plans, and yet others accumulate and use enormous 
bodies of knowledge. And though wc don't yet know enough about how 
each of those brain-centers works, we do know their construction is based 
on information that is contained in tens of thousands of inherited genes, 
so that each brain-part works in a way thar depends on a somewhat different 
set of laws. 

Once we recognize that our brains conrain such complicated machinery, 
this suggests that we need to do the opposite ol what those physicists 
did: instead of searching for simple explanations, we need to find more 
complicated ways to explain our most familiar mental events. The meanings 
of words like "feelings," "emotions," or "consciousness" seem so 
natural, clear, and direct to us that we cannot see how to start thinking 
about them. However, this book will argue that none of those popular 
psychology words refers to any single, definite process; instead each of 
those words attempts to describe the effects of large networks of processes 
inside our brains. For example, Chapter 4 will demonstrate that "consciousness" 
refers to more than twenty different such processes! 

It might appear to make everything worse, to change some things 
that looked simple at first into problems that now seem more difficult. 
However, on a larger scale, this increase in complexity will actually make 
our job easier. For, once we split each old mystery into parts, we will have 
replaced each old, big problem with several new and smaller ones—each 
of which may stiil be hard but no longer will seem unsolvable. Furthermore, 
Chapter 9 will argue that regarding ourselves as complex machines 
need not diminish our feelings of self-respect, and should enhance our 
sense of responsibility. 

To start dividing those old big questions into smaller ones, this book 


INTRODUCTION 

will begin by portraying a typical brain as containing a great many parts 
that we'll call "resources." 


We'll use this image whenever we want to explain some mental activity 
(such as Anger, Love, or Embarrassment) by trying to show how that 
stare of mind might result from the activities of a certain collection of 
mental resources. For example, the stare called "Anger" appears to arouse 
resources that make us react with unusual speed and strength—while suppressing 
resources that we otherwise use to plan and act more prudently; 
thus, Anger replaces your cautiousness with aggressiveness and trades your 
sympathy for hostility. Similarly, the condition called "Fear" would engage 
resources in ways that cause you to retreat. 

Citizen: I sometimes find myself in a state where everything 
seems cheerful and bright. Other times (although nothing has 
changed) all my surroundings seem dreary and dark, and my 
friends describe me as "down" or "depressed," Why do I have such 
states of mind—or moods, or feelings, or dispositions—and what 
causes all of their strange effects? 

Some popular answers to this are, "Those changes are caused by chemicals 
in the brain,"'or "They result from an excess ofstress," or "They come from 
thinking depressing thoughts." However, such statements say almost nothing 
about how those processes actually work—whereas the idea of selecting a 
set of resources can suggest more specific ways in which our thinking can 
change. For example, Chapter 1 will begin by thinking about this very 
familiar phenomenon: 


THE KMOTION MACHINE 

When a person you know has fallen in love, it's almost as though 
someone new has emerged—a person who thinks in other ways, 
with altered goals and priorities. It's almost as though a switch had 
been thrown and a different program has started to run. 

What could happen inside a brain to make such changes in how it thinks? 
Here is the approach this book will take: 

Each of our major "emotional states" results from turning certain 
resources on while turning certain others off—and thus changing 
some ways that our brains behave. 

But what activates such sets of resources? Our later chapters will argue 
that our brains must also be equipped with resources that we shall call 
"Critics"-—each of which is specialized to recognize some certain condition—
and then to activate a specific collection of other resources. Some 
of our Critics are built in from birth, to provide us with certain "instinctive" 
reactions—such as Anger, Hunger, Fear, andThirst—which evolved 
to help our ancestors survive. Thus, Anger and Fear evolved for defense 
and protection, while Hunger and Thirst evolved for nutrition. 


However, as we learn and grow, we also develop ways to activate other, 
new sets of resources to use—and rhis leads to types of mental states that 
we regard as more "intellectual" than "emotional." For example, whenever 
a problem seems hard to you, then your mind will start to switch among 
different Ways to Think—by selecting different sets of resources that can 
help you to divide the problem into smaller parrs, or find suggestive analogies, 
or retrieve solutions from memories—or even ask some other person 
for help. 


INTR()l)i;cmON

The rest of this book will argue that this could be what provides our 
species with our uniquely human resourcefulness. 

Each of our major Ways to Think results from turning certain resources 
on while turning certain others offhand thus changing some ways 
that our brains behave. 

For example, our first few chapters will try to show how this could explain 
such states of mind as Love, Attachment, Grief, and Depression in terms 
of how they exploit our resources. Then the later chapters will do the same 
for more "intellectual" sorts of thought. 

Citizen: It seems strange that you've given the same description 
both for emotions and for regular thinking. But thinking is basically 
rational—dry, detached, and logical—whereas emotions enliven 
our ways to think by adding irrational feelings and biases. 

There is a traditional view in which emotions add extra features to plain, 
simple thoughts, much as artists use colors to augment the effects of blackand-
white drawings. However, this book will argue, instead, that many of 
our emorional states result when certain particular Ways to Think start to 
suppress our use of certain resources! For example, Chapter 1 will portray 
"infatuation" as a condition in which we suppress some resources that we 
might otherwise use to recognize faults in somebody else. Besides, I think 
it's a myth that there's any such thing as purely logical, rational thinking—-
because our minds are always affected by our assumptions, values, 
and purposes. 

Citizen: I still think your view of emotions ignores too much. For 
example, emotional states like fear and disgust involve the body as 
well as the brain, as when we feel discomfort in die chest or gut, or 
palpitations of the heart, or when we feel faint or tremble or sweat. 

I agree that this view may seem too extreme—but sometimes, to explore 
new ideas, we need to set our old ones aside, at least temporarily. For 
example, in the most popular view, emotions are deeply involved with 
our bodies' conditions. However, Chapter 7 will take the opposite view, 
by regarding our body parts as resources that our brains can use to change 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

(or maintain) their mental states! For example, you sometimes can make 
yourself persist at a plan by maintaining a certain facial expression. 

So, although this book is called The Emotion Machine, it will argue 
that emotional states are not especially different from the processes that 
we call "thinking"; instead, emotions are certain ways to think that we use 
to increase our resourcefulness—that is, when our passions don't grow 
till they handicap us—and this variety of Ways to Think must be such a 
substantial part of what we call "intelligence" that perhaps we should call 
it "resourcefulness," And this applies not only to emotional states but to 
all ol our mental activities: 

If you "understand™ something in only one way, then you scarcely 
understand it at all—because when you get stuck, you'll have nowhere 
to go. But if you represent something in several ways, then when you 
get frustrated enough, you can switch among different points of view, 
until you find one that works fir you! 

Accordingly, when we design machines to mimic our minds—that is, to 
create Artificial Intelligences—we'll need to make sure that those machines, 
too, are equipped with sufficient diversity: 

If a program works in only one way, then it gets stuck when that 
method fails. But a ptogram that has several ways to ptoceed 
could then switch to some other approach, or search for a suitable 
substitute. 

This idea is a central theme of this book—and it is firmly opposed to 
the popular view that each person has a central core—some sort of invisible 
spirit or self—from which all their mental abilities originate. For that 
seems a demeaning idea—that all our virtues are secondhand—or that we 
deserve no credit for our accomplishments, because they come to us as 
gifts from some other source. Instead, I see our dignity as stemming from 
what we each have made of ourselves: a colossal collection of different 
ways to deal with different situations and predicaments. It is that diversity 
that distinguishes us from most of the other animals—and from all the 
machines that we've built in the past—and every chaptet of this book will 
discuss some of the sources of our uniquely human resourcefulness. 


INTRODUCTION

Chapter 1. We are born with many mental resources. 
Chapter 2. We learn more from interacting with others. 
Chapter 3. Emotions are different Ways to Think. 
Chapter 4. We learn to think about our recent thoughts. 
Chapter 5. . We learn to think on multiple levels. 
Chapter 6. We accumulate huge stores ofcommonsense knowledge. 
Chapter 7. We switch among different Ways to Think. 
Chapter 8. We find multiple ways to represent things. 
Chapter 9. We build multiple models of ourselves. 


For centuries, psychologists searched for ways to explain our everyday 
mental processes—yet many thinkers still today regard the nature of mind 
as a mystery. Indeed, it still is widely believed that minds are made of 
ingredients that can only exist in living things, that no machine could feel 
or think, worry about what might happen to it, or even be conscious that 
it exists—or could ever develop the kinds oftdeas that could lead to great 
paintings or symphonies. 

This book will pursue all those goals at once: to suggest how human 
brains might work and to design machines that can feel and think. Then 
we can try to apply those ideas both to understand ourselves and to develop 
Artificial Intelligence. 

How This Book Handles Quotations and References 

Each statement in quotation marks is by an actual person; if it also has a 
date, the source will be in the bibliography. 

Marcel Proust 1927: "Each reader reads only what is already inside 
himself. A book is only a sort of optical instrument which the 
writer offers to let the reader discover in himself what he would 
not have found without the aid of the book." 

A statement without quotation marks is a fictional comment a reader 
might make. 

Citizen: If our everyday thinking is so complex, then why does it 
seem so straightforward to us? 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Most references are conventional bibliographical citations, such as 

Schank, 1975: Roger C. Schank, Conceptual Information Processing. New York: 
American Elsevier, 1975. 

Some references are to pages on the World Wide Web. 

Lenac 1998: Douglas B. Lenat. The Dimensions of Context Spate. Available at 

h t tp: //www. eye . co m / doc/ co n text-s pace. pdf. 

Some other references are to "newsgroups" on the Web, such as 

McDermou 1992: Drew McDermott, In comp.ai.philosophy. February 7, 1992. 

To access such newsgroup documents (along with the context in which 
they were written) one can make a Google search for comp.ai.philosophy 
McDermott 1992, So I will try to maintain copies of these on my Web 
site at www.emotionmachine.net. Readers ate also invited to use that site 
for sending questions and comments to me. 

Note: This book uses the term "resource" where my earlier book, The 
Society of Mind, used "agent. "I made this change because too many readers 
assumed that an "agent" is a personlike thing (like a travel agent) that could 
operate independently, or cooperate with others in much the same ways 
that people do. On the contrary, mosr resources are specialized to certain 
kinds of jobs for certain other resources, and cannot directly communicate 
with most of the persons other resources. For more details about how 
these two books relate, see the article by Push Singh 2003, who helped to 
develop many of the ideas in tliis book. 


1 


FALLING IN LOVE 


J -1 Infatuation 

"In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes, 
For they in thee a thousand errors nore; 
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise." 


—Shakespeare 

Many people find it absurd to think of a person as like a machine—so we 
often hear such statements as this: 

Citizen: Of course machines can do useful things. We can make 
them add up huge columns of numbers or assemble cars in factories. 
But nothing made of mechanical stuff could ever have 
genuine feelings like love. 

No one finds it surprising these days when we make machines that do 
logical things, because logic is based on clear, simple rules of the sorts 
that computers can easily use. But Love, by its nature, some people would 
say, cannot be explained in mechanical ways—nor could we ever make 
machines that possess any such human capacities as feelings, emotions, 
and consciousness. 

What is Love, and how does it work? Is this something that we want 
to understand, or is it one of those subjects that we don't really want to 
know more about? Hear our friend Charles attempt to describe his latest 
infatuation. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

"I've just fallen in love with a wonderful person. I scarcely can 
think about anything else. My sweetheart is unbelievably perfect—
of indescribable beauty, flawless character, and incredible 
intelligence. There is nothing I would not do for her." 

On the surface such statements seem positive; they're all composed of 
superlatives. But note that there's something strange about this: most of 
those phrases of positive praise use syllables like "w«," "less," and "in"— 
which show that they really are negative statements describing the person 
who's saying them! 

Wonderful. Indescribable. 
(I can't figure out what attracts me to her.) 
I scarcely can think of anything else. 
(Most of my mind has stopped working.) 
Unbelievably perfect. Incredible. 
(No sensible person believes such things.) 
She has a flawless character. 
(I've abandoned my critical faculties.) 
There is nothing I would not do for her. 
(I've forsaken most of my usual goals.) 


Our friend sees all this as positive. It makes him feel happy and more 
productive, and relieves his dejection and loneliness. But what if most of 
those pleasant effects result from his success at suppressing his thoughts 
about what his sweetheart actually says: 

"Oh, Charles-—a woman needs certain things. She needs to be 
loved, wanted, cherished, sought after, wooed, flattered, cosseted, 
pampered. She needs sympathy, affection, devotion, understanding, 
tenderness, infatuation, adulation, idolatry—that isn't much 
to ask, is it, Charles?"1 

Thus, Love can make us disregard most defects and deficiencies, and make 
us deal with blemishes as though they were embellishments—even when, 
as Shakespeare said, we still may be partly aware of them: 

"When my love swears that she is made of truth, 
I do believe her, though 1 know she lies," 



FALLING IN LOVE H 

We are equally apt to deceive ourselves, not only in our personal lives but 
also when dealing with abstract ideas. There, too, we often close our eyes 
to conflicts and clashes between our beliefs. Listen to Richard Feynman's 
words: 

"That was the beginning and the idea seemed so obvious to me 
that 1 fell deeply in love with it. And, like falling in love with a 
woman, it is only possible if you don't know too much about her, 
so you cannot see her faults. The faults wilt become apparent later, 
hut after the love is strong enough to hold you to her. So, I was 
held to this theory, in spite of all the difficulties, by my youthful 
enthusiasm." 

—1966 Nobel Prize lecture 

What docs a lover actually love? That should be the person to whom you're 
attached—bur if your pleasure mainly results from suppressing your other 
questions and doubts, then you're only in love with Love itself. 

Citizen: So far, you have spoken only about what we call infatuation—
sexual lust and extravagant passion. That leaves out most 
of the usual meanings of "love"—such as tenderness, trust, and 
companionship. 

Indeed, once those short-lived attractions fade, they sometimes go on to 
be replaced by more enduring relationships, in which we exchange our 
own interests for those of the persons to whom we're attached: 

Love, n. That disposition or state of feeling with regard to a person 
which (arising from recognition of attractive qualities, from 
instincts of natural relationship, or from sympathy) manifests 
itself in solicitude for the welfare of the object, and usually also in 
delight in his or her presence and desire for his or her approval; 
warm affection, attachment. 

—Oxford English Dictionary 

Yet even this larger conception of Love is still too narrow to cover enough, 
because Love is a kind of suitcase-like word, which includes other kinds of 
attachments like these: 


\1 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

The love of a parent for a child. 

A child's affection for parents and friends. 

The bonds that make lifelong companionships. 

The connections of members to groups or their leaders. 

We also apply that same word Love to our involvements with objects, feelings, 
ideas, and beliefs—and not only to ones that are sudden and brief, 
but also to bonds that increase through the years. 

A convert's adherence to doctrine or scripture. 

A patriots allegiance to country or nation. 

A scientist's passion for finding new truths. 

A mathematician's devotion to proofs. 

Why do we pack such dissimilar things into those single suitcase-words? As 
we'll see in Section 1-3, each of our common "emotional" terms describes 
a variety of different processes. Thus we use the word Anger to abbreviate 
a diverse collection of mental states, some of which change our ways 
to perceive, so that innocent gestures get turned into threats—and thus 
make us more inclined to attack. Fear also affects the ways we react but 
makes us retreat from dangerous things {as well as from some that might 
please us too much). 

Returning to the meanings of Love, one thing seems common to all 
those conditions: each leads us to think in different ways: 

When a person you know has fallen in love, it's almost as though 
someone new has emerged—a person who thinks in other ways, with 
altered goals and priorities. It's almost as though a switch had been 
thrown and a different program has started to run. 

This book is mainly filled with ideas about what could happen inside our 
brains to cause such great changes in how we think. 

1-2 The Sea of Mental Mysteries 

From time to time we think about how we try to manage our minds: 

Why do I waste so much of my time? 
What determines to whom I'm attracted? 



FALLING IN LOVE

Why do I have such strange fantasies? 
Why do I find mathematics so hard? 
Why am 1 afraid of heights and crowds? 
What makes me addicted to exercise? 


But we can't hope to understand such things without adequate answers to 
questions like these: 

What sorts of things are emotions and thoughts? 
How do our minds build new ideas? 
What are the bases for our beliefs? 
How do we learn from experience? 
How do we manage to reason and think? 


In short, we all need better ideas about the ways in which we think. But 
whenever we start to think about that, we encounter yet more mysteries. 

What is the nature of consciousness? 
What are feelings and how do they work? 
How do our brains imagine things? 
How do our bodies relate to our minds? 
What forms our values, goals, and ideals? 


Now, everyone knows how Anger feels—or Pleasure, Sorrow, Joy, and 
Grief—yet we still know almost nothing about how those processes actually 
work. As Alexander Pope asks in his Essay on Man, are rhese things 
that we can hope to understand? 

"Could he, whose rules the tapid comet bind, 
Describe or fix one movement of his mind? 
Who saw its fires here rise, and there descend. 
Explain his own beginning, or his end?" 


How did we manage to find out so much about atoms and oceans and 
planets and stars—yet so little about the mechanics of minds? Thus, Newton 
discovered just three simple laws that described the motions of all 
sorts of objects; Maxwell uncovered just four more laws that explained 
all electromagnetic events; then Einstein reduced all those and more into 
yet smaller formulas. All this came from the success of those physicists' 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

quest: to find simple explanations far things that seemed, at first, to be highly 
complex. 

Then, why did the sciences of the mind make less progress in those 
same three centuries? I suspect that this was largely because most psychologists 
mimicked those physicists, by looking for equally compacr solutions 
to questions about mental processes. However, that strategy never found 
small sets of laws that accounted for, in substantial detail, any large realms 
of human rhought. So this book will embark on the opposite quest: to find 
more complex ways to depict mental events that seem simple at first! 

This policy may seem absurd to scientists who have been trained to 
believe such statements as, "One should never adopt hypotheses that make more 
assumptions than one needs. "But it is worse to do the opposite—as when we 
use "psychology words" that mainly hide what they try to describe. Thus, 
every phrase in the sentence below conceals its subject's complexities: 

You look at an object and see what it is. 

For, "look at" suppresses your questions about the systems that choose 
how you move your eyes. Then, "object" diverts you from asking how 
your visual systems partition a scene into various patches of color and 
texture—and rJren assign them to differenr "things," Similarly, "see what it 
/Vserves to keep you from asking how recognitions relate to other things 
that you've seen in the past. 

It is the same for most of the commonsense words we use when we try 
to describe the events in minds—as when one makes a statement like, "I 
think I understood what you said. " Perhaps the most extreme examples of 
this are when we use words like jww and me, because we all grow up with 
this fairy tale: 

We each are constantly being controlled by powerful creatures inside 
our minds who do our feeling and thinking for us, and make our 
important decisions for us. We call these our "Selves"or "Identities"— 
and we believe that they always remain the same, no matter how we 
may otherwise change. 

This "Single-Self" concept serves us well in our everyday social affairs. 
But it hinders our efforts to think about what minds are and how they 
work—because, when we ask about what Selves actually do, we get the 
same answer to every such question: 


FALU.NG IN LOVE 

Your Self sees the world by using your senses. Then it stores what 
it learns in your memory. It originates all your desires and goals— 
and then solves all your problems for you, by exploiting your 
"intelligence." 


A SELF CONTROLLING ITS PERSON'S MIND 

What attracts us to this queer idea, that we don't make any decisions 
ourselves but delegate them to some other entity? Here are a few kinds of 
reasons why a mind might entertain such a fiction: 

Child psychologist: As a child, you learned to distinguish among 
some persons in your environment. Later, you somehow came to 
conclude that you are such a person, too—but at the same time, 
you may have assumed that there is a person inside of you. 

Psychotherapist: The Single-Self legend helps makes life seem 
pleasant, by hiding from us how much we're controlled by all 
sorts of conflicting, unconscious goals. 

Practical person: That image makes us efficient, whereas better 
ideas might slow us down. It would take too long for our hardworking 
minds to understand everything all the time. 

However, although the Single-Self concept has practical uses, it does not 
help us to understand ourselves—because it does not provide us with smaller 
parts we could use to build theories of what we are. When you think of 
yourself as a single thing, this gives you no clues about issues like these: 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

What determines the subjects I think about? 
How do I choose what next to do? 
How can I salve this difficult problem? 


Instead, the Single-Self concept offers only useless answers like these: 

My Self selects what to think about. 
My Self decides what I should do next. 
I should try to make my Seif get to work. 


Whenever we wonder about our minds, the simpler are the questions we 
ask, the harder it seems to find answers to them. When asked about a 
complex physical task like, "How could a person build a bouse," you might 
answer almost instantly, "Make a foundation and then build walls and a 
roof." However, we find it much harder to think of what to say about 
seemingly simpler questions like these: 

How do you recognize things that you see? 
How do you comprehend what a word means? 
What makes you like pleasure more than pain? 


Of course, those questions are not really simple at all. To "see" an object or 
"speak" a word involves hundreds of different parrs of your brain, each of 
which does some quite difficult jobs. Then why don't we sense that complexity? 
That's because most such jobs are done inside parts of the brain 
whose internal processes are hidden from the rest of the brain. 

At the end of this book, we'll come back to examine the concepts of 
Self and Identity, and conclude that the structures that we call our Selves 
are elaborate structures that each of us builds to use for many purposes. 

Whenever you think about your "Self," you are switching among a 
huge network of models, each of which tries to represent some particular 
aspects of your mind—to answer some questions about yourself 

1-3 Moods and Emotions 

William James 1890: "If one should seek to name each particular 
one of them of which the human heart is the seat, each race of 


FALLING IN LOVE 

men having found names for some shade of feeling which other 
races have left undiscriminated .. . all sorts ol groupings would 
be possible, according as we chose this character or that as a basis. 
The only question would be, does this grouping or that suit our 
purpose best?" 

Sometimes a person gers into a state where everything seems to be cheerful 
and bright-—although nothing outside has actually changed. Other times 
everything pleases you less: the entire world seems dreary and dark, and 
your friends complain that you seem depressed. Why do we have such 
states of mind—or moods, or feelings, or dispositions—and what causes 
all their strange effects? Here are some of the phrases we find when dictionaries 
define emotion. 

The subjective experience of a strong feeling, 
A state of mental agitation or disturbance. 
A mental reaction involving the state of one's body. 
A subjective rather than conscious affection. 
The parts of consciousness that involve feeling. 
A nonrational aspect of reasoning. 


If you didn't yet know what emotions are, you certainly wouldn't learn 
much from this. What is subjective supposed to mean, and what could a 
conscious affection be? In what ways do those parts of consciousness become 
involved with what we call "feelings"* Must every emotion involve a disturbance? 
Why do so many such questions arise when we try to define what 
emotion means? 

The reason for this is simply that emotion is one of those suitcaselike 
words that we use to conceal the complexity of very large ranges of different 
things whose relationships we don't yet comprehend. Here are a few of 
the hundreds of terms that we use to refer ro our mental conditions: 

Admiration, Affection, Aggression, Agitation, Agony, Alarm, 
Ambition, Amusement, Anger, Anguish, Anxiety, Apathy, Assurance, 
Attraction, Aversion, Awe, Bliss, Boldness, Boredom, 
Confidence, Confusion, Craving, Credulity, Curiosity, Dejection, 
Delight, Depression, Derision, Desire, Detest, Disgust, Dismay, 
Distrust, Doubt, etc. 


\H THE EMOTION MACULE 

Whenever you change your mental state, you might try to use those 
emotion-words to try to describe your new condition—but usually each 
such word or phrase refers to too wide a range of states. Many researchers 
have spent their lives at classifying our states of mind, by arranging 
terms \\ke feelings, dispositions, tempers, and moods into orderly charts or 
diagrams-—but should we call Anguish a feeling or a mood? ls Sorrow a 
type of disposition? No one can settle the use of such terms because different 
traditions make different distinctions, and different people have 
different ideas about how to describe their various states of mind. How 
many readers can claim to know precisely how each of the following 
feelings feels?2 

Grieving for a lost child 
Fearing that nations will never live in peace 
Rejoicing in an election victory 
Excited anticipation of a loved one's arrival 
Terror as your car loses control at high speed 
Joy at watching a child at play 
Panic at being in an enclosed space 


In everyday life, we expect our friends to know what we mean by Pleasure 
or Fear—but I suspect that attempting to make our old words more precise 
has hindered more than helped us to make theories about how human 
minds work. So this book will take a different approach, by thinking of 
each mental condition as based on the use of many small processes. 

1-4 Infant Emotions 

Charles Darwin 1872: "Infants, when suffering even slight pain, 
moderate hunger, or discomfort, utter violent and prolonged 
screams. Whilst thus screaming their eyes are firmly closed, so 
rhat the skin round them is wrinkled, and rhe forehead contracted 
into a frown. The mouth is widely opened with the lips retracted 
in a peculiar manner, which causes it to assume a squarish form; 
the gums ot teeth being more or less exposed." 


FALLING IN LOVE 

One moment your baby seems perfecdy well, but then come some restless 
motions of limbs. Next you see a few catches of breath, and then suddenly 
the air fills with screams. Is baby hungry, sleepy, or wet? Whatever the trouble 
may turn out to be, those cries compel you to find some way to help—and 
once you find the remedy, things quickly return to normal. In the meantime 
though, you, too, feet distressed. When a friend of yours cries, you can ask 
her what's wrong—but when your baby abruptly changes his state, there 
may seem to be "no one home" to communicate with. 

Of course, I do not mean to suggest that infants don't have "personalities." 
Soon after birth you can usually sense that a particular baby reacts 
more quickly than others, or seems more patient or irritable, or even more 
inquisitive. Some of those traits may change with time, but others persist 
throughout life. Nevertheless, we still need to ask, What could make an 
infant so suddenly switch, between one moment and the next, from contentment 
or calmness to anger or rage? 

To answer that kind of question, you would need a theory about 
the machinery that underlies that infant's behavior. So let's imagine that 
someone has asked you to build an artificial animal. You could start by 
making a list of goals that your animal-robot needs to achieve. It may 
need to find parts with which to repair itself. It may need defenses against 
attacks. Perhaps it should regulate its temperature. It may even need 
ways to attract helpful friends. Then once you have assembled that list, 
you could tell your engineers to meet each of those needs by building a 
separate "instinct-machine"—and then to package them all into a single 
"body-box." 

SENSORS Eyes, Skin, Ears, etc. 

[Hunger] [Heat]! Defense^ | Procreatinn j[Etc.| 

MOTORS Arms, Legs, Face, Voice, Etc. 

What goes inside each instinct-machine? Each of them needs three 
kinds ol resources: some ways to recognize situations, some knowledge 
about how to react to these, and some muscles or motors to execute 
actions. 


THK EMOTION MACHINI-


Sensors to Knowledge Motors to 
recognize about how carry out 
conditions. to react. actions. 

What goes inside that knowledge box? Let's begin with the simplest 
case: suppose that we already know, in advance, all the situations our robot 
will face. Then all we need is a catalog of simple, two-part "If-* Do "rules— 
where each //describes one of those situations, and each Do describes an 
action to take. Let's call this a "Rule-Based Reaction-Machine. " 

Rule Based Reaction-Machine 


/Fs Z)os 

//"you are too hot. Move into the shade 

If you. are hungry, Find something to eat. 

If you're facing a threat, Select some defense. 

Every infant animal is born with many If-> Do rules like these. For example, 
each human infant is born with ways to maintain its body temperature: when 
too hot, it can pant, sweat, stretch out, or vasodilate; when too cold, it can 
shiver, retract its limbs, or vasoconstrict—or metabolize to produce more heat. 
Then later in life, we learn to use actions that change the external world. 

If you are too cold, Turn on a heater. 

If your room is too hot, Open a window. 

If there's too much sunlight, Pull down the shade. 

It would be naive to try to describe a mind as nothing more than bundles 
of If—*Do rules. However, the great animal psychologist Nikolaas Tin



I \l I IM, IN L0V1


bergen showed in his book The Study of Instinct* that when such rules 
are combined in certain ways, they can account for a remarkable range 
of different things that animals do. This sketch shows only a part ol the 
structure that Tinbergen proposed to explain how a certain fish behaves. 


Of course, it would need much more than this to support the higher 
levels of human thought. The rest of this book will describe some ideas 
about the structures inside our human minds. 

1-5 Seeing a Mind As a Cloud of Resources 

We all know ways to describe our minds, as they appear to us when seen 
from outside: 

Albert Einstein 1950: "We are all ruled in what we do by impulses; 
and these impulses are so organized that our actions in general 
serve for our self preservation and that of the race. Hunger, love, 
pain, fear are some of those inner forces which rule the individual's 
instinct for self preservation. At the same time, as social beings, 
we are moved in the relations with our fellow beings by such feelings 
as sympathy, pride, hate, need for power, pity, and so on." 

This book will try to show how such states of mind could come from 
machines inside our brains. To be sure, many thinkers still insist that 
machines can never feel or think. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Citizen: A machine can do only what it is programmed to do, and 
does it without any thinking or feeling. No machine can get tired 
or bored or have any kind of emotion at all. It cannot care when 
something goes wrong, and, even when it gets things right, ir feels 
no sense of pleasure, pride, or delight in those accomplishments. 

Vitalist: That's because machines have no spirits or souls, and no 
wishes, ambitions, desires, or goals. That's why a machine will 
just stop when it's stuck—whereas a person will struggle to get 
something done. Surely this must be because people are made of 
different stuff; we arc alive and machines are not. 

In earlier times, those views seemed plausible, because living things seemed 
so different from machines—and no one could even begin to conceive of 
how physical things could feel or think. But once we developed more 
scientific instruments (and better ideas about science itself), then "life" 
became less mysterious, because now we could see that each living cell 
consists of hundreds of kinds of machinery. 

Holist: Yes, but many people still maintain that there will always 
remain a mystery about how a living thing could ever result from 
nothing more than mechanical stuff. Surely we're more than the 
sum of our parts. 

That once was a popular belief, but today it is widely recognized that 
behavior of a complex machine depends only on how its parts interact, 
bur not on rhe "stuff" of which they are made (except for matters of speed 
and strength). In other words, all that matters is the manner in which each 
part reacts to the other parts to which it is connected. For example, we can 
build computers that behave in identical ways, no matter if they consist 
of electronic chips or of wood and paper clips—provided that their parts 
perform the same processes, so far as the other parts can see. 

This suggests replacing old questions like, "What sorts of things are 
emotions and thoughts?" by more constructive ones like, "What processes 
does each emotion involve?" and "How could machines perform such processes?" 
To do this, we'll srart with the simple idea that every brain contains 
many parrs, each of which does certain specialized jobs. Some can recognize 
various patterns, others can supervise various actions, yet others can 


FALUINK; IN LOVE:

formulate goals or plans, and some can contain large bodies of knowledge. 
This suggests that we could envision a mind (or a brain) as composed of a 
great many different "resources." 


At first this image may seem hopelessly vague—yet it can help us start 
to understand how a mind could make a large change in its state. For 
example, the state we call "angry" could be what happens when you activate 
some resources that help you react with more speed and strength—while 
also suppressing some other resources that usually make you act prudently. 
This will replace your usual cautiousness with aggressiveness, change 
empathy into hostility, and cause you to plan less carefully. All of this 
could result from turning on the resource labeled Anger in this diagram: 


Similarly, we could explain such mental conditions as Hunger and 
Fear—and we could even account for what happened to Charles in his 
state ol acute infatuation: perhaps such a process turned off the resources 
he normally used to recognize another person's faults—and also supplanted 
some of his usual goals by ones that he thought Celia wants him 
to hold. So now, let's make a generalization: 

Each of our major "emotional states" results from turning certain 
resources on while turning certain others off-—thus changing the way 
one's brain behaves. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

And although that may seem like an oversimplification, we'll take it to 
a further extreme, because we see emotional states as particular types of 
Ways to Think. 

Each of our various Ways to Think results from turning certain 

resources on while turning certain others off-—thus changing the way 

one's brain behaves. 

In this way, we can regard our mental states as what happens when different 
sets of resources interact, and most of this book will be about how 
some of those mental resources might work. First, perhaps, we ought to ask 
how those resources originate. Clearly, some of them must have evolved 
to promote functions that keep our bodies alive; Anger and Fear evolved 
for protection, and Hunger evolved to serve nutrition—and many such 
"basic instincts" are already built into our brains at birth. Other resources 
appear in later years, such as the ones involved with reproduction (which 
often engages some risky behaviors); some of these also must be inborn, 
but others must be mainly learned. 

What happens when several selections are turned on at once, so that 
some resources get both aroused and suppressed? This could lead to some 
of the mental states in which we say, "Our feelings are mixed." For example, 
when one detects some sort of threat, this might arouse parts of both 
Anger and Fear. 


Then if one tried both to attack and retreat, that could lead to paralysis—
and that sometimes occurs in some animals. However, human minds 
can escape from such traps, as we'll see in some later chapters, by using 
"higher-level" resources to help to settle such conflicts. 

Student: I could better grasp what you're talking about if you 

could be a bit more precise about what you mean by the word 


KM TING IN LOVE 

resource. Do you imagine that each resource has a separate, definite 
place in the brain? 

I'm using resource in a hazy way, to refer to all sorts of structures and 
processes that range from perception and action to Ways to Think about 
bodies of knowledge. Some such functions are performed in certain particular 
parts of the brain, while others use parts that are more widely 
spread over much larger portions of the brain. Other parts of this book 
discuss more ideas about the kinds of resources our brains seem to support, 
as well as how their functions might be organized. However, I won't 
try to identify where these might fie in the brain because research on this 
is advancing so quickly that any conclusion one might make today could 
be outdated in just a few weeks. 

As we said, this resource-cloud idea may at first seem too vague—bur 
as we develop more detailed ideas about how our mental resources behave, 
well gradually replace it with more elaborate theories about how our mental 
resources are organized. 

Student: You speak of a persons emotional stares as nothing more 
than ways to think, but surely that's too cold and abstract—too 
intellectual, dull, and mechanical. Besides, it doesn't explain the 
pleasures and pains that come when we succeed or rail, or the 
thrills that we experience from works of artistic genius. 

Rebecca West: "It overflows the confines of the mind and becomes 
an important physical event. The blood leaves the hands, the feet, 
the limbs, and flows back to the heart, which for the time seems to 
have become an immensely high temple whose pillars are several 
sorts of illumination, returning to the numb flesh diluted with 
some substance swifter and lighter and more electric than itself,"4 

Many traditional views of emotions emphasize the extent to which events 
that occur in our body parts can affect our mental processes—as when we 
experience muscular tensions. However, our brains do not directly detect 
those tensions, but only react to signals that come through nerves that 
connect to those body parts. So while our bodies can play important roles, 
we can also regard our bodies, too, as composed of resources our brains 
can exploit. 


THK EMOTION MACHlMi: 

The rest of this book will focus on what sort of mental resources we 
have, what kinds of things each resource might do, and how each affects 
those to which it is connected. Well begin by developing more ideas about 
what turns resources off and on. 

Student: Why should one ever turn ofFa resource? Why not keep 

them all working all the time? 

Indeed, certain resources are never switched off—such as those involved 
with vital functions like respiration, balance, and posture—or those that 
constantly keep watch for certain particular types of danger. However, 
if all our resources were active at once, they would too often get into 
conflicts. You can't make your body both walk and run, or move in two 
different directions at once. So when one has several goals that are incompatible, 
because they compete for the same resources (or for time, space, 
or energy), then one needs to engage processes that have ways to manage 
such conflicts. 

It is much the same in a human society: when different people have 
different goals, they may be able to pursue these separately But when this 
leads to excessive conflict or waste, societies often then create multiple levels 
of management in which (at least in principle) each manager controls 
the activities of certain lower-level individuals. 

Presidents 


However, both in societies and in brains, few "higher-level executives" 
know enough of the system's details to specify what must be done—hence, 
much of their "power" in fact consists in selecting among options proposed 
by their subordinates. Then, in effect, those low-level individuals will, at 
least transiently, be controlling or constraining what their superiors do. 

For example, whenever some mental process gets stuck, it may need to 
split the problem into smaller parts, or to remember how a simitar problem 
was solved in the past, or to make a series of different attempts and 
then to compare and evaluate these—or to try to learn some completely 


F\IT IN<; I'M I.OVE 

different way to deal with such situations. This means that a low-level process 
inside your mind may engage so many higher-level ones that you end 
up in some new mental state that amounts to a different Way to Think. 


What if a person were to attempt to use several such Ways to Think 
at once? Then these would have to compete for resources, and that would 
need high-level management—which would usually choose one alternative. 
This could be one reason why it seems to us that our thoughts flow 
in serial, step-by-step streams—despire the fact that every such step must 
still be based on many smaller processes that operate simultaneously. In 
any case, this book will suggest that this so-called "stream of consciousness" 
is an illusion that comes because each higher-level part of one's mind 
has virtually no access to knowledge about what happens in most of one's 
other processes. 

Citizen: This idea of switching one's set of resources might explain 
the behavior of an insect or fish—but Charles doesn't switch, in 
the way you describe, to a totally different mental state. He just 
changes some aspects of how he behaves. 

I completely agree. However, any theory has ro begin with a highly simplified 
version of it—and even this trivial model could help to explain why 
human infants so frequently show such sudden changes in their states. But 
certainly, in later years, children develop more fiuenr techniques through 
which their resources can be aroused and suppressed to different extents— 
and this leads to more ability to combine both old instincts and new Ways 
to Think. Then, several of these can be active at once—and that's when we 
speak of our feelings as mixed. 

1-6 Adult Emotions 

"Behold the child, by nature's kindly law, 
Pleas'd with a rattle, tickl'd with a straw: 



THDEMOTION MACHINE 

Some livelier plaything gives his youth delight, 

A little louder, but as empty quite: 

Scarfs, garters, gold, amuse his riper stage, 

And beads and pray'r books are the toys of age." 

—Alexander Pope, in Essay on Man 

When an infant gets upset, that change seems as quick as the flip of a switch. 

A certain infant could not bear frustration, and would react to 

each setback by throwing a tantrum. He'd hold his breath and his 

back would contract so that he'd fall rearward on his head. 

Yet several weeks later, that behavior had changed. 

No longer completely controlled by his rage, he could also add 

ways to protect himself, so that when he felt a tantrum coming 

on, he'd run to collapse on some soft, padded place. 

This suggests that, in the infant brain, only one "Way to Think" can work 
at a time, so that not many conflicts will arise. However, those infantile 
systems cannot resolve the conflicts we lace in our later lives. This led our 
ancestors to evolve higher-level systems in which some instincts that formerly 
were distinct could now become increasingly mixed. But as we gained 
more abilities, we also gained new ways to make mistakes, so we also had to 
evolve new ways to control ourselves, as we'll see in Chapter 9-2. 

We tend to regard a problem as "hard" when we've tried several methods 
without making progress. But it isn't enough just to know that you're 
stuck: you'll do better if you can recognize that you're lacing some particular 
kind of obstacle. For if you can diagnose what Type of Problem 
you face, this can help you to select a more appropriate Way to Think. 
So this book will suggest that to deal with hard problems, our brains 
augmented their ancient Reaction-Machines with what we'll call "Critic-
Selector Machines." 

Critic-Selector based Machine 


Critics Selectors 


EALUMMNLOVE 

The simplest versions of these would be the "If-*Do" machines 
described in Section 1-4. There, when an "If" detects a certain real-
world situation, its "Do" reacts with a certain real-world action. Of 
course, this means that simple If-*Do machines are highly constrained 
and inflexible. 

However, the "Critics" of Critic-Selector Machines will also detect 
situations or problems inside the mind such as serious conflicts between 
active resources. Similarly, the "Selectors" of Critic-Selector Machines 
don't just perform actions in the external world, they can react to mental 
obstacles by turning other resources on or off—thus switching to different 
Ways to Think. 

For example, one such Way to Think would be to consider several 
alternative ways to proceed before selecting which action to take. Thus, 
an adult who encounters what might be a threat need not just react 
instinctively, but first could proceed to deliberate on whether to retreat or 
attack—by using high-level strategies to choose among possible ways to 
react. This way, one could make a thoughtful choice between becoming 
angry or becoming afraid. Thus when it seems appropriate to intimidate 
an adversary, one can make oneself angry deliberately—although one may 
not be aware that one is doing this. 

How and where do we develop our higher-level Ways to Think? We 
know that during our childhood years, our brains go through multiple 
stages of growth. To make room for these, Chapter 5 will conjecture that 
this results in at ieast six levels of mental procedures, and this diagram will 
summarize our main ideas about how human minds are organized. 



THK EMOTION MACHINK 

The lowest [evel of this diagram corresponds to the most common 
kinds of "instincts" with which our brains are equipped from birth. The 
highest levels support the sorts of ideas that we later acquire and call by 
names like ethics or values. In the middle are layers of methods we use to 
deal with all sorts of problems, conflicts, and goals; this includes much of 
our everyday commonsense thinking. For example, at the "deliberative" 
level, you might consider several different actions to take, then imagine 
the efFects of each, and then compare those alternatives. Then, at the 
"reflective" levels, you might think about what you have done and wonder 
if the decisions you made were good—and finally, you might "self-reflect" 
about whether those actions were wotthy of the ideals that you have set 
for yourself. 

We all can observe the progression of our children's values and abilities. 
Yet none of us can recollect the early steps of our own mental growth! 
One reason for this could be that, during those times, we kept developing 
ways to build memories—and each time we switched to new versions of 
these, that made it difficult to retrieve (or to understand) the records we 
made in previous times. Perhaps those old memories still exist, but in 
forms that we no longer can comprehend—so we cannot remember how 
we progressed from using our infantile reaction-sets to using our more 
advanced Ways to Think. We've rebuilt our minds too many times to 
remember how our infancies felt! 

1-7 Emotion Cascades 

Charles Darwin 1871: "Some habirs are much more difficult to 
cure or change than others are. Hence a struggle may often be 
observed in animals between different instincts, or between an 
instinct and some habitual disposition; as when a dog rushes after 
a hare, is rebuked, pauses, hesitates, pursues again, or returns 
ashamed to his master; or as between the love of a female dog for 
her young puppies and for her master,—-for she may be seen to 
slink away to them, as if half ashamed of not accompanying her 
master." 

This chapter has raised some questions about how people could change 
their states so much. Let's look back to our first example of this: When 


FALLING IN LOVE 

someone you know has fallen in love, it's almost as though a switch has been 
thrown, and a different program has started to run. Our Critic-Selector model 
of mind suggests that such a change could result when a certain Selector 
activates a certain particular set of resources. Thus Charles's attraction to 
Celia becomes stronger because a certain Selector has suppressed most of 
his usual fault-finding Critics. 

Psychologist: Indeed, infatuations sometimes strike suddenly. But 
other emotions may slowly flow and ebb—and usually, in our 
later years, our mood shifts tend to become less abrupt. Thus, an 
adult may be slow to take offense, but may then go on to brood 
for months about even a small or imagined affront. 

Our twenty-year-old tabby cat shows few signs of human maturity. At 
one moment she'll be affectionate, and seek out our companionship. 
But after a time, in the blink of an eye, she'll rise to her feet and walk 
away, without any sign of saying good-bye. In contrast, our twelve-yearold 
canine pet will rarely deparr without looking back-—as though he's 
expressing a certain regret. The cat's moods seem to show one at a time, 
but rhe dog's dispositions seem more mixed, and less as though controlled 
by a switch. 

In either case, any large change in which resources are active will substantially 
alter one's mental state. Such a process might begin when one 
Selector resource directly arouses several others. 


Then, some of those newly aroused resources may proceed to activating 
yet other ones—and if each such change leads to several more, this all 
could result in a large-scale "cascade." 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 


The further these activities spread, the more they will change your 
mental state, but, of course, this won't change everything. When Charles 
engages a new Way to Think, not all his resources will be replaced—so, in 
many respects he'll still be the same. He will still be able to see, hear, and 
speak—but now he'll perceive things in different ways, and may select different 
subjects to discuss. He may now have some different attitudes, but 
still will have access to most of his commonsense knowledge. He will still 
have some of the same plans and goals—but different ones will be pursued 
because they now have different priorities. 

Yet despite all these changes, Charles will insist that he still has the 
same "identity." To what extent will he be aware of how his mental condition 
has altered? He sometimes won't notice those changes at all, but at 
other times, he may find himself asking questions like, "Why am } getting 
so angry now?" However, even to think of asking such questions, Charles's 
brain must be equipped with ways to "self-reflect" on some of his recent 
activities—for example, by recognizing the spreading of certain cascades. 
Chapter 4 will discuss how this relates to the processes that we call "consciousness," 
and Chapter 9, at the end of this book, will talk more about 
the concepts of Self and Identity. 

1-K Theories of Feelings, Meanings, and Machines 

Citizen: What are emotions, and why do we have them? What is 

the relation between ones emotions and one's intellect? 

When we talk about a person's mind, we usually use the plural, emotions, 
but we always use the singular noun to speak about someone's intellect. 
However, this book will take the view that each person has multiple Ways 


FALLING IN LOVE 

to Think, and what we call "emotional" states are merely different examples 
of these. To be sure, we all grow up with the popular view that we 
have only a single Way to Think—-called "logical" or "rational"—but that 
our thinking can be colored, or otherwise influenced by so-called emotional 
factors. 

However, the concept of Rational Thinking is incomplete—because 
logic can only help us to draw conclusions from the assumptions that we 
happen to make-—but logic, alone, says nodiing about which assumptions 
we ought to make, so Chapter 7-4 will talk about more than a dozen other 
Ways to Think, in which logic plays only minor roles, while more of our 
mental power comes from finding useful analogies. 

In any case, our Citizen's question illustrates our all-too-common 
tendency to try to divide any complex thing into two separate, complementary 
parts—-such as emotion vs. intellect. However, Chapter 9-2 will 
argue that few such two-part distinctions really describe two genuinely 
different ideas. Instead, those "dumbbell" theories merely suggest a single 
idea and then contrast it with everything else. To avoid that, this book will 
take the view that, whenever you think about something complex, you 
should try to depict it with more than two parts, or else switch to some 
different Way to Think! 

Citizen: Why would one want to think of oneself as though one 

were nothing more than a machine? 

Saying that someone is like a machine has come to have two opposite 
meanings: (1) "to have no intentions, goals, or emotions," and (2) "to 
be relentlessly committed to a single purpose or policy." Each meaning 
suggests inhumanity, as well as a kind of stupidity, because excessive 
commitment results in rigidity, while lack of purpose leads to aimlessness. 
However, if the ideas in this book are right, both of those views will 
be obsolete, because we'll show ways to make machines that not only 
will have persistence, aim, and resourcefulness, but also will have hosts of 
checks and balances—as well as abilities to grow by further extending 
their abilities. 

Citizen: But machines can't feel or imagine things. So even if we 

could make them think, would they not still be missing the sense 

of experience that gives meaning to our human lives? 


THE [.MOTION MACHINE 

We have many words that we can use to try to describe how we feel—but 
our culture has not encouraged us much to make theories of how those 
feelings work. We know that anger makes us more belligerent, and that 
contented people less often get into fights—but those emotions-words 
don't point to ideas about how those conditions affect our mental states. 

We recognize this when we deal with machines: Suppose that one 
morning your car won't start, but when you ask your mechanic for help, 
you receive only this kind of reply: "It appears that your car doesn't want 
to run. Perhaps it has become angry at you because you haven't been treating 
it well." Clearly a "mentalistic" description like this won't help to explain 
how your car behaves. Yet we don't get annoyed when people use those 
kinds of words to describe events in our social lives. 

However, if one wants to understand any complex thing—be it a 
brain or an automobile—one needs to develop good sets of ideas about 
the relationships among the parts inside. To know what might be wrong 
with that car, one must have enough knowledge to ask if there's something 
wrong with its starter switch, or whether the fuel tank has been completely 
drained, or whether some excessive strain has broken some shaft, 
or if some electrical circuit fault has completely discharged the battery. In 
the same way, one cannot get much from seeing a mind as a Single Self: 
one must study the parts to know the whole. So the rest of this book will 
argue that, for example, to understand why "being angry" feels the way it 
does, you will need much more detailed theories about the relationships 
among the parts of your mind. 

Citizen: If my mental resources keep changing so much, what 

gives me the sense that I'm still the same Self, no matter how 

happy or angry I get? 

Why do all of us come to believe that somewhere, deep in the heart of 
each mind, there exists some permanent entity that experiences all our 
feelings and thoughts? Here is a very brief sketch of how I will try to 
answer this in Chapter 9: 

In our early stages of development, our low-level processes solve 
many small problems without any sense of how this happens. 
However, as we develop more levels of thought, those higher 
levels start to find ways to represent some aspects of our recent 


KAJ.LUNG IN LOVE 

thoughts. Eventually these develop into collections of "models" 

of ourselves. 

A simple model of a person's Self might consist of just a few parts connected 
like those shown below. However, each person eventually builds 
more complex Self-models that represent ideas about, for example, one's 
social relationships, physical skills, and economic attitudes. So Chapter 9 
will argue that when you say "Self," you are referring not to a single representation 
but to an extensive network of different models that represent 
different aspects of yourself 


In the usual view of how human minds grow, each child begins with 
instinctive reactions, but then goes through stages of mental growth that 
give us additional layers and levels of processes. Those older instincts may 
still remain, but these new resources gain increasing control—until we 
can think about our own motives and goals and perhaps try to change or 
reformulate them. 

But how could we learn which new goals to adopt? No infant could 
ever be wise enough to make good such choices by itself. So Chapter 2 will 
argue that our brains must come equipped with special kinds of machinery 
that help us, somehow, to absorb the goals and ideals of our parents 
and friends! 


2 


ATTACHMENTS 
AND GOALS 


2-1 Playing with Mud 

"It's not just learning things that's important. It's learning what to 
do with what you learn and learning why you learn things at all 
that matters." 

—Norton Juster, in The Phantom Tollbooth 

A child named Carol is playing with mud. Equipped with a fork, a spoon, 
and a cup, her goal is to bake a make-believe cake. Let's assume that at first 
she is playing atone. 

Playing alone. Carol wants to fill her cup with mud, and first 
tries to do this with her fork, but this fails because the mud slips 
through. She feels frustrated and disappointed. But when she succeeds 
by using her spoon, Carol feels satisfied and pleased. 

What could Carol learn from this? She learns from her "trial and error" 
experience chat forks are not good for carrying mud. But then she learns 
from success with a spoon that spoons are good tools for moving a fluid, 
so she is likely to use this method the next time she wants to fill a cup. 
Note that here Carol was working alone—and acquired new knowledge, 


ATTACBMEiNTS AND COALS

all by herself. In the course of learning by trial and error> a person requires no 
teacher to help her. 

A stranger scolds. Now a stranger appears and reproaches her: "That 
is a naughty thing to do," Carol feels anxious, alarmed, and afraid. 
Overcome by fear and the urge to escape, she interrupts her present 
goal—and runs to find her parent's protection. 

What should Carol learn from this? This may have little or no effect on 
what she will learn about mud or about filling a cup-—but she's likely to 
conclude that she has placed herself in an unsafe location. Next time shell 
play in some safer place. Also, a sequence of scary encounters like this could 
make her become less adventurous. 

Her mother scolds. Carol returns to her mother for help, but instead 
of defense or encouragement, all she gets is a reproof: "What a 
disgusting mess you've made! See all the mud on your clothes and 
your lace. I scarcely can bear to look at you!" Carol, ashamed, 
begins to cry. 

What might Carol learn from this? She'll become less inclined toward 
playing with mud, whereas if her parent had chosen to praise her instead, 
she would have felt pride instead of shame—and in future times would be 
more inclined toward the same kind of play. In the face of a parent's blame 
or reproach, she learns that her goal was not a good one to pursue. 

Think of how many emotional states our children engage in the 
thousand minutes of each waking day! In this very brief story we've 
touched upon Satisfaction, Affection, and Pride—feelings we think of 
as positive—and we also encountered Shame, Fear, Disgust, and Anxiety—-
conditions we think of as negative. What are the functions of all 
those mental conditions, and why do we so often classify them as positive 
and negative? 

In most popular views of how learning works, the "positive" feelings 
that come with success are somehow involved with making us learn new 
ways to behave—whereas the "negative" feelings that failures bring make 
us learn ways to not behave. However, while this may apply to some animals, 
this idea of "learning by positive reinforcement" does not account 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

for so much of how people learn because, frequently, failures help more 
than successes do, when we try to acquire deeper ideas. 

We'll return to learning in Chapter 8, but this chapter will be more 
concerned with how we acquire new kinds of goals than with how we 
learn ways to achieve them. And because adult minds are so intricate, well 
begin by discussing what children do. 

2-2 Attachments and Goals 

Some of our strongest emotions come when we are near rhe persons to 
whom we've become attached. When we're praised or rejected by people 
we love, we don't just feel Pleasure or Dissatisfaction; instead, we tend to 
feel Pride or Shame. Of course, some functions of early acrachments are 
clear: they help young animals to survive by providing nourishment, comfort, 
and defense. However, this section will argue that those particular 
feelings of Pride and Shame may play unique and peculiar roles in how 
humans develop new values and goals. 

Most mammals, shortly after birth, can move and follow their mothers 
about—but humans are exceptions to that. Why did human infants evolve 
their much slower pace of development? Surely this was partly because their 
larger brains needed more time to mature. But also, as those more powerful 
brains led to more complex societies, our children no longer had time 
enough to learn from individual experience. Instead, we evolved ways to 
learn more efficiently by passing, directly from parent to child, enormous 
bodies of cultural knowledge. In short, we then became able to learn by 
"being told"! However, this did not become feasible until our big new brains 
evolved more powerful ways to represent knowledge—and then to "express" 
that knowledge in ways that eventually led to our languages. 

To transmit that knowledge ftom parent to child, each party needed 
effective ways to engage and maintain each other's attention. Of course, 
our ancestors already had traits that helped to accomplish this; fot 
instance, the infants of most animal species arc born equipped with 
squeaks or squeals that arouse their parents from deepest sleep—and 
the brains of those parents contain machinery to force them to react to 
those cries. For example, those parents feel intense distress when they 
lose track of their infants' locations, while the infants have instincts that 
make them shriek whenever their parents become unavailable. 


ATTAfl-lMKNTS AND GOALS 

Also, as the length ol their infancies grew, our children evolved 
increasing concern with how their parents reacted to them—and parents 
started to focus more on the growth ol their children's values and goals. 
Thus, in the scene where Carol's mother reproached her, the child was 
likely to think thoughts like, "I should not have wanted to play with mud, 
because that turned out to be an unsuitable goal. " In other words, Carol's 
shame caused her to change her goals instead of just learning ways to 
achieve them! Similarly, it her mother had praised her for her play, that 
praise could have led Carol to deepen her interest in material science 
and engineering. 

It is one thing to learn how to get what you want—and another to 
learn what you ought to want. In our usual learning by trial and error, we 
improve our ways to achieve the goals that we already hold. However, 
when we "self-consciously" reflect on our goals (see Chapter 5-6), we're 
likely to change their priorities-—and what I am suggesting is that self-
conscious emotions like Pride and Shame play special roles; they help us 
learn ends instead of means. Thus, where trial and error teach us new ways 
to achieve the goals we already maintain—attachment-related blame and 
praise teach us which goals we should discard or retain. Listen to Michael 
Lewis depict some of the potent effects of shame: 

Michael Lewis 1995b: "Shame results when an individual judges 
his or her actions as a failure in regard to his or her standards, 
rules and goals and then makes a global attribution. The person 
experiencing shame wishes to hide, disappear or die. It is a highly 
negative and painful state that also disrupts ongoing behavior and 
causes confusion in thought and an inability to speak. The body 
of the shamed person seems to shrink, as if to disappear from the 
eye of the self or others. Because of the intensity of this emotional 
state, and the global attack on the self-system, all that individuals 
can do when presented with such a state is to attempt to rid 
themselves of it." 

But when do people experience such intense and painful self-conscious 
sensations? Such feelings frequently come to us when we're in the presence 
of those we respect, or those by whom we wish to be respected; long ago 
this was recognized by anorher outstanding psychologist: 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Aristotle b: "Now since shame is a mental picture of disgrace, in 
which we shrink from the disgrace itself and not from its consequences, 
and we only care what opinion is held of us because of 
the people who form that opinion, it follows that the people before 
whom we feel shame are those whose opinion of us matters to us. 
Such persons are: those who admire us, those whom we admire, 
those by whom we wish to be admired, those with whom we are 
competing, and whose opinion of us we respect." 

This suggests that our values and goals are greatly influenced by the people 
to whom we become "attached"—at least in our earliest "formative" years. 
So the following sections will ask about how that type of learning might 
work, by discussing such questions as these: 

What are the spans of those "formative" years? 
To whom do our children become attached? 
When and how do we outgrow attachments? 
How do attachments help us establish our values? 


You're almost always pursuing goals. Whenever you're hungry, you try to 
find food. When you sense danger, you strive to escape. When you've been 
wronged, you may wish for revenge. Sometimes your goal is to finish some 
work—or perhaps to seek ways to escape from it. We have a host of different 
words for such activities—such as to try, wish, want, aim, strive, and 
seek—bur we rarely ask ourselves questions like these: 

What are goals and how do they work? 
What are the feelings that accompany them? 
What makes some goals strong and others weak? 
What could make an impulse "too strong to resist"? 
What makes certain goals "active" now? 
What determines how long they'll persist? 


Here is one useful theory about when we use words like want and goal: You 
say that you want a certain thing when you have an active mental process that 
works to reduce the difference between your present situation and one in which 
you possess that thing. Here is a sketch of how a machine could do this: 


ATTACHMENTS AND GOALS 


For example, every baby is born with two such systems for maintaining 
"normal" body temperature. One such "goal" is aroused when the 
child is too hot—and causes it to sweat, pant, stretch out, or vasodilate. 
However, when the baby is too cold, it will curl up, shiver, vasoconstrict, 
and/or raise its metabolic rate. 


WAYS TO REACT TO BEING TOO HOT 

Instinctive (Actions) Deliberate 


WAYS TO REACT TO BEING TOO COLD 

Chapter 6-3 will show some more details of these kinds of goal-
seeking machines. 

When such processes work at low cognitive levels, at first we may not 
recognize them—for example, when you get too hot and start to sweat. 
However, when perspiration drips, you may notice this and deliberate: 
"/ must find some way to escape from this heat"'Then your higher-level 
knowledge suggests other actions that you could take—such as moving to 


THK AMOTION MACHINi: 

a cooler place. Similarly, when you recognize that you feel cold, you might 
put on a sweater, turn on a stove, or begin to exercise (which can make 
your body produce ten times as much heat). 

When you need to remove several differences, then this may require several 
steps. For example, suppose that you're hungry and want to eat, but you 
have only a can of soup. Then you'll needz tool to open that can, you'll needio 
find a bowl and a spoon, and you'll needa. place where you can sit down to eat. 
So, each such need is a "subgoal" that comes from some difference between 
what you have now and what you desire. 


[subgoal] fsubgoalj 
A SIMPLE "SUBGOAL TREE" 

Of course, to achieve several goals efficiently, you will need a plan, 
or else you might waste a good deal of time. It would be foolish to first 
sit down to eat before you have prepared your food, because then you 
would have to get up to start over again. Chapter 5 will talk about how 
one could envision which sequence of steps to take. As for what goals are, 
how they work, and what makes some goals seem more urgent than others, 
we'll postpone such questions till Chapter 6, where we'll also discuss 
how goals are stored and later retrieved, as well as how we learn new ways 
to achieve them. For now, we'll focus only on how we learn new goals 
and ideals. 

2-3 Imprimers 

"Never let your sense of morals prevent you from doing the 
right thing." 
—Isaac Asimov 


While Carol was learning to fill her cup, she was annoyed when she failed 
with a fork, but she was pleased by success when using a spoon—so the 


ATTACHMENTS AND GOALS 

next time she wants to fill a cup, she'll be more likely to know what to do. 
This is the most common conception of how people learn—that our reactions 
are "reinforced by success." This may seem commonsensical—but 
we need a theory of how that might work. 

Student: I suppose that her brain formed connections from her 
goal to the actions that helped her to achieve it. 

Okay, but that is rather vague. Could you say more about how that might 
work? 

Student: Perhaps Carol starts with some goals just floating 
around—but when she succeeds by using her spoon, then she 
somehow connects "Fill Cup" to her "Use Spoon" goal. Also, 
when she fails with the fork, she makes a "do not" connection for 
"Use Fork," to keep from doing that again. So next time she wants 
to fill a cup, she'll fitst try the subgoal of using a spoon. 


CONNECTING A SUBGOAL 

That could be a good explanation of how Carol could connect a new 
subgoal to her original goal. And 1 approve of your mentioning "do not" 
connections because we must not only learn to do things that work, but we 
must also learn ways to avoid the most common mistakes. This suggests 
our mental connections should get "reinforced" by success, but should be 
suppressed whenever our actions don't work. 

However, although this kind of "learning by trial and error" can connect 
new subgoals to existing goals, it does not explain how a person could 
learn completely new goals—ot what we call "values" or "ideals"—that 
don't yet connect to existing ones. More generally, it does not cover the 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

subject of how one could learn what one "ought" to want. I don't recall 
much discussion of this in academic psychology books, so here I'll conjecture 
that children do this in a special way that depends on how they 
interpret the reactions of the persons to whom they are 'attached." 

Our language uses a great many words for referring to our emotional 
states. When we described Carol's playing with mud, we used more than 
a dozen of them—Affection, Alarm, Anxiety, Assurance, Disappointment, 
Disgrace, Disturbance, Frustration, Fear, Inclination, Pleasure, Pride, Satis


faction, Shame, and Sorrow. This raises many questions about why we have 
such mental states at all—and why do we have so many of them? In particular, 
we need to ask; What makes Carol feel grateful and proud when 
her mother praises her? How might that "attachment bond" make her so 
much more concerned about her mother's regard for her? And how could 
this manage to "elevate" goals to make them seem more respectable? 

Student: My theory also fails to explain why praise from a stranger 
won't elevate goals. Why does this require the presence of—I can't 
think of the proper word for this—"a person to whom one is 
attached?" 

I think it is remarkable that we do not have a special word for such a significant 
type of relationship! Psychologists cannot say "parent," or "mother," 
or "father" because a child can also become attached to anothet relative, 
nurse, or family friend. Psychologists often use the word caregiver for this— 
but as we'll see in Section 2-7, such attachments can form without physical 
care, so caregiver does not quite hit the target. So this book will introduce a 
new term derived from the old word imprinting, which has long been used 
by psychologists to refer to the processes that keep young animals close to 
their parents, 

Imprimer: An Imprimer is one of those persons to whom a child 

has become attached. 

In most other species of animals, the function of infant attachment seems 
clear: remaining close to parents helps to keep their offspring safe. However, 
in humans it seems to have other effects; when Carol's Imprimer praises her, 
she feels a special thrill of pride that elevates her present goal to a status that 


ATTACH MENTS AM) GOALS 45 

is more "respectable," Thus, Carol's goal to work with mud may have begun 
as nothing more than a casual urge to play with materials in her environment. 
But—according to my conjecture here-—her Imprimers praise (or 
blame) appears to change the status of that goal into something more like 
an ethical value (or into one she regards as dishonorable). 

Why might our brains use machinery that causes an Imprinter's praise 
to have an effect so different from that of praise that comes from a stranger? 
It is easy to see why this would have evolved: if strangers could change your 
high-level goals, they could get you to do whatever they want, simply by changing 
what you, yourself, want to do! Children with no defense against this 
would be less likely to survive, so evolution would tend to select those who 
have ways to resist that effect. 

2-4 Attachment-Learning "Elevates" Goals 

Michael Lewis 1995b: "Each of us has beliefs about what constitutes 
acceptable actions, thoughts and feelings. We acquire our 
standards, rules and goals through acculturation . . . and each of 
us has acquired a set appropriate to our particular circumstances. 
To become a member of any group, we are required to learn 
them. Living up to one's own internalized set of standards—or 
failing to live up to them—forms the basis of some very complex 
emotions." 

When Carol's loved ones censure her, she feels that her goals are unworthy 
of her or that she is unworthy of her goals. And even in her later years, 
when her Imprimers are far from the scene, she still may wonder about 
how they might feci about her: Would they approve of what I am doing? 
Would they praise the way I'm thinking now? What kinds of machinery 
might we engage that makes us experience such concerns? Lets listen to 
Michael Lewis again: 

Michael Lewis 1995b: "The so-called self-conscious emotions, 
such as guilt, pride, shame and hubris, require a fairly sophisticated 
level of intellectual development. To feel them, individuals 
must have a sense of sell as well as a set ot standards. They must 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

also have notions of what constitutes success or failure, and the 

capacity to evaluate their own behavior." 

Why would the growth of such personal values depend upon a child's 
attachments? Again we can see how this might have evolved: a child who 
lost her parents' esteem would be less likely to survive. Also, if those parents 
themselves want to earn the respect of their friends, they will want 
their children to "behave" in socially acceptable ways. So now we've seen 
several different ways in which our children might change themselves: 

Positive Experience: When a method succeeds, learn to use that subgoal. 

Negative Experience: When a method fails, learn to not use that 

subgoal. 

Aversion Learning: When a stranger scolds, learn to avoid such 

situations. 

Attachment Praise: When an imprimer praises, elevate your goal. 

Attachment Censure: When an imprimer scolds, devalue your goal. 

Internal Imprinting: When an imprimer scolds, devalue your goal. 

In Section 2-2 we saw a way to make a new goal depend upon an existing 
one, so that it could serve as a subgoal for it—the way we attached 
"Use Spoon" to "Fill Cup." But how could we "elevate" a goal above the 
ones we already hold? We can't leave it floating in empty space, because it 
would be useless for one to learn anything new unless one also connects 
it to ways to retrieve it when it is relevanr. This means that we need some 
answers to questions about to what each new goal should be attached, when 
and how it should be aroused, and how long to pursue it before giving up. 
We'll also need more ideas about how a mind (or brain) could decide, 
when several goals are engaged at once, which of them should get higher 
priority. We'll talk about that in Chapter 5. And, of course, we'll need to 
clarify what kind of thing a goal might be—but we'll postpone that until 
Chapter 6. 

However, here we'll start by focusing on how our goals might be organized. 
We already suggested in Chapter 1-6 that our mental resources 
might be located at various levels in whar we described as an organizational 
layer cake. 


ATTACHMENTS AND COALS 


A SIX-LEVEL MODEL OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

This six-level image is intended to be vague, because our brains are 
not so neatly arranged. However, this gives us a way to begin: imagine that 
the kinds of goals called "values" or "ideals" are attached to resources near 
the top, while our more infantile aims come from resources near the base 
of that cake. Then the arrow in this diagram suggests a possible meaning 
for "elevate." 

To "elevate" a goal could mean to copy, move, or link it to some 

higher location in that tower. 

Then, our attachment-based learning scheme could be summarized in the 
form of this more general rule: 

If you detect Praise and an Imprimer is present, Then "elevate" 

your present goal. 

But why should we need Imprinters at all—and why should we choose 
them so selectively, rather than simply elevate goals in response to anyone's 
censure or praise? Presumably, rhat rule evolved to include Imprimers 
because, as we noted before in Section 2-3, we all would be in danger if 
any stranger could reprogram our goals. 

Student: But surely that is not always true; I am not immune to 
compliments—even from persons I don't respect. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

If attachment-based learning exists, it would be only one part of the story. Many 
other kinds of events can make us learn in other ways. The resourcefulness of 
the human mind comes from having multiple ways to deal with things—no 
matter that, from time to time, this causes bad things to happen to us. 

2-5 Learning, Pleasure, and Credit Assignment 

When Carol succeeded at filling her cup, she felt satisfaction and a sense 
of reward—but what functions did those feelings serve? It would seem 
that this process involved at least these three steps: 

Carol recognized that her goal was achieved. 

She felt some pleasure about her success. 

Then, somehow, that helped her to learn and remember. 

Now we're happy that Carol felt gratified, but why can't she just "simply 
remember" which methods worked and which ones failed? What kinds of 
roles does pleasure play in establishing new memories? 

The answer is that "remembering" is not simple at all. On the surface, 
it might seem easy enough—like dropping a note into a box and then taking 
it out when you need it. But when we look more closely, we see that 
this must involve many processes: you first must decide what items your 
note should contain, and find suitable ways to represent them—and then 
you must make some connections to them so that after you store those 
parts away, you'll he able to reassemble them. 

Student: Can't we explain all this with the old idea that, for each 
of our accomplishments, we just "reinforce" our successful reactions? 
In other words, we simply "associate" the problem we faced 
with the action or actions that solved it, by making one more 
If—*Then rule. 

That might help to describe what learning does—when seen from outside—
but it doesn't explain how learning works. For neither "the problem 
we faced" nor "the actions we took" are simple objects that we can connect—
so first your brain will need to construct descriptions for both that 


ATTACHMENTS AND COALS 

//and that Then. Ol course, the quality of what you learn will depend on 
the content ol those two descriptions: 

The //must describe some relevant features and relationships of 
the situation you faced. 
The Then must describe some relevant aspects of the successful 
actions you took. 

For Carol to learn effectively, het brain will need to identify which of 
her tactics turned out to help, and which of them only wasted her time. 
For example, after her struggle ro fill the cup, should Carol attribute her 
final success to the shoes or the dress she was wearing then, or whether 
the weather was cloudy or clear, or to the location in which those events 
occurred? Let's suppose that she smiled while using that fork, but happened 
to frown when using that spoon; then what keeps her from learning 
irrelevant rules like, "To fill a cup, it helps to frown't 

In other words, when a person learns, it is not just a matter of "making 
connections" but is also a matter of making the structures that then 
get connected—which means that we need to find some ways to represent not 
only those external events, hut also the relevant mental events. Thus, Carol 
will need some reflective resources to choose which of the Ways to Think 
that she used should be among the things that she remembers. No theory 
of learning can be complete unless it includes ideas about how we make 
these "credit assignments." 

Student: You still haven't explained where feelings come in, such 

as the pleasure that comes from Carol's success. 

In everyday life, we routinely use terms like Suffering, Pleasure, Enjoyment, 
and Grief— but get stuck when we try to explain what these mean. The 
trouble comes, I think, because we think of such "feelings" as simple or 
basic, whereas each one involves intricate processes. For example, I suspect 
that what we call "Pleasure" \s involved with the methods we use to identify 
which of our recent activities should get credit for our recent successes. Chapter 
8-5 will talk about why human brains need powerful ways to make these 
kinds of "credit assignments," and Chapter 9-4 will argue that this may 
engage machinery that prevents us from thinking about other things. If 
so, we may have to recognize that many effects of Pleasure are negative! 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

2-6 Conscience, Values, and Self-Ideals 

"I did nor, however, commit suicide, because I wished to know 
more of mathematics." 
—Bertrand Russell 

One way people differ from animals (except, perhaps, the elephants) is in 
the great lengths of our childhoods. This surely must be one reason why 
no other species accumulates anything close to our human traditions and 
values. 

What kind of person would you like to be? Are you careful and cautious 
or brave and audacious? Do you follow the crowd, or prefer to lead? 
Would you rather be tranquil or driven by passion? Such personal traits 
depend, in parr, upon each person's inheritance. But also they arc partly 
shaped by our networks of social attachments. 

Once our human attachment bonds form, they begin to serve multiple 
functions. First, they keep children close to their parents—and this provides 
such services as nutrition, defense, and companionship. But also (if my theory 
is right) our attachments provide each child with new ways to rearrange 
his priorities. Also, the self-conscious emotions that come with attachment 
have other, very specific effects; Pride tends to make you more confident, 
more optimistic, and more adventurous, while Shame makes you wane to 
change yourself so that you will never get into that state again. 

What happens when a young child's Imprimers go absent? Shortly, we'll 
see some evidence that this usuallv leads to severe distress. However, older 
children better tolerate this, presumably because each child makes "internal 
models1' that help them to predict their Imprimers' reactions. Then each 
such model would serve its child as an "internalized" system of values—and 
this could be how people develop what we call ethics, conscience, or moral 
sense. Perhaps Sigmund Freud had such a process in mind when he suggested 
that children can "introject" some of their parents' attitudes. 

How might a child attempt to explain the praising and scolding that 
now he will sense—even though no Imprimer is present? This might 
make a child imagine that there was another person inside his mind—perhaps 
in the form of a made-up companion. Or perhaps the child might 
embody that model into a certain external object, such as a rag doll or a 
baby blanket. We know how distressed a child can get when deprived of 
those irreplaceable objects.' 


ATTACHMENTS AND GOALS

We should also ask what might happen if a child somehow gained 
more control over how that internal model behaves—-so that now that 
child could praise himself—and thus select which goals to elevate—or else 
that child could censure himself, and thus impose new constraints on himself. 
This would make him "ethically autonomous" because he now can 
replace some of his imprinted value-sets. Then, if some of those older 
values persist in spite of attempts to altet them, this could lead to conflicts 
in which the child opposes his former Imprimers. However, if that child's 
brain were able to change all of its previous values and goals, then there 
would remain no constraints at all on what kind of person emerges from 
this—it could even be a sociopath. 

What determines the kinds of ideals that develop inside each human 
mind? Every society, club, or group evolves some social and moral codes, 
by inventing various rules and taboos that help it decide what it ought 
to do or should not do. Those sets of constraints have awesome effects 
on every kind of organization; they shape the customs, traditions, and 
cultures of families, nations, professions, and faiths. They even can 
make those establishments value themselves above everything else—so 
that their members are happy to die for them, in endless successions of 
battles and wars. 

How do people justify their ethical standards and principles? I'll parody 
several ideas about this. 

Social contractor: There is no absolute basis at all fot the values 

and goals that people adopt. They merely are based on agreements 

and contracts that each individual makes with the rest of us. 

Sociobiologist: That "social contracr" idea seems neat—except that 
no one remembers agreeing to it! Instead, I suspect that our ethics 
are mainly based on traits that evolved in our ancestors—just as 
in those breeds of dogs which were bred for becoming attached to 
their masters; in humans, we call this trait "loyalty." 

Clearly, some of our traits are partly based on genes that we have inhetited, 
but others spread in the form of contagious ideas that propagate from 
each brain to the next as parts of a cultural heritage.2 


THE EMOTION MAC HIM', 

Theologian: There is only one basis for moral rules, and only my 
sect knows the way to those truths. 

Optimist: I deeply believe that ethical values are self-evident. 
Everyone would be naturally good, except for being corrupted by 
being raised in abnormal environments. 

Rationalist: I'm suspicious of terms like deeply believe and self-
evident because they seem to mean only, "I cannot explain why I 
believe this, "and, "I don't want to know how I came to believe it. " 

To be sure, some thinkers might argue that we can use logical reasoning to 
deduce which high-level goals to choose. However, it seems to me that logic 
can only help us deduce what's implied by the assumptions we make—but it 
cannot help us to choose among which assumptions we ought to assume. 

Mystic: Reasoning only clouds the mind by detaching it from reality. 
Until you learn not to think so much, you will never achieve 
enlightenment. 

Psychoanalyst: Relying on "instincts" may only hide your unconscious 
goals and desires from you. 

Existentialist: Whatever goal you happen to have, you should ask 
what purpose that purpose serves—and when you keep on doing 
this, soon you will see that your world is a total absurdity. 

Sentimentalist: You're too concerned with goals and aims. Just 
watch some children and you will see curiosity and playfulness. 
They are not seeking any goals, but are enjoying the finding of 
novelties and the pleasures of making discoveries. 

We like to think that a child's play is unconstrained, but when children 
appear to feel joyous and free, that may merely conceal their purposefulness; 
you can see this more clearly when you attempt to drag them away 
from their chosen tasks. In fact, the "playfulness" of childhood is the most 
demanding teacher that one could have; it makes us explore our world 
to see what's there, to try to explain what all those structures are, and to 


ATrACHMENTS AM) COALS 

imagine what else could possibly be. Exploring, explaining, and learning 
must be among a child's most obstinate drives—and never again in those 
children's lives will anything push them to work so hard. 

2-7 Attachments of Infants and Animals 

"We want to make a machine that will be proud of us." 
—Danny Hillis 


The young child Carol loves to explore, but she also likes to stay near 
to her mother—so, if she discovers that she is alone, she'll soon cry out 
and look for her mom. Also, whenever the distance between them grows, 
she quickly moves herself closer. And whenever there's cause for fear or 
alarm—such as when a stranger approaches her—that same behavior will 
appear, even when her mother is near. 

Presumably, this dependency stems from our infantile helplessness: no 
human infant would long survive if she could escape from parental care, 
but that rarely happens because our infants can ha idly move themselves at 
ail. Fortunately, not much harm results from thar because of an opposite 
bond that we also evolved: Carols mother is almost always aware of what 
is happening to her daughter—and her full attention will be engaged at 
the slightest suspicion that something is wrong. 

Clearly, each infant's survival depends on becoming attached to persons 
concerned with his welfare. So in older times it was often assumed 
that children would attach themselves to the persons who gave them physical 
care, and this is why most psychologists called such a person a "caregiver"—
instead of using some word like Imprinter. However, physical care 
may not be the most critical factor, as suggested by John Bowlby, who 
pioneered systematic research on infant attachment. 

John Bowlby 1973a: "Thar an infant can become attached toothers 
of the same age, or only a little older, makes it plain thar attachment 
behavior can develop and be directed towards [persons who 
have] done nothing to meet the infant's physiological needs."J 

Then what are the functions of our children's attachments? Bowlby's main 
concern was to refute the then popular view that attachment's ptimary 


% THE EMOTION MACHINE 

function was to ensure a dependable source of food. Instead, he argued 
that nutrition played a smaller role than did physical security, and that (in 
our animal ancestors) our attachments served mainly to ward off attacks 
from predators. Here is a paraphrase of his argument: 

First, an isolated animal is much more likely to be attacked than 
is one that stays bunched together with others of its kind. Second, 
attachment behavior is especially easy to arouse in animals that— 
by reason of age, size, or conditions—are especially vulnerable to 
predators. Third, this behavior is strongly elicited in situations of 
alatm, which are commonly ones m which a predator is sensed or 
suspected. No other theory fits these facts. 

I suspect that this was largely correct for most animals, but does not sufficiently 
emphasize how human attachments also help us to acquire our 
high-level values and goals. This still leaves us with the question of what 
are the factots that determine to whom our children will become attached? 
Physical nurture can play a significant role (by providing occasions for 
children to become attached)—but Bowlby concluded that, usually, these 
two other factors were more important: 

The quickness with which the person responds, and 
The intensity of that interaction. 


In any case, a child's Imprimers will usually include his parents, but 
could also include his companions and friends. This suggests that parents 
should take special care to examine their offsprings acquaintances—and, 
especially, the ones who arc most attentive to them. (For example, when 
selecting a school, a parent ought to scrutinize not only the staff and curriculum, 
but also the goals that its pupils pursue.) 

What happens when a child is deprived of Imprimers? Bowlby concluded 
that this eventually leads to a special variety of fear, and a powerful 
impulse to find that Imprinter. 

John Bowlby 1973b: "Whenever a young child .. . is separated 
ftom his mothet unwillingly he shows distress; and should he also 
be placed in a strange environment and cared for by a succession 
of strange people such distress is likely to be intense. The way he 


ATTACHMENTS AND GOALS

behaves follows a typical sequence. At first he protests vigorously 
and tries by all the means available to him to recover his mother. 
Later he seems to despair of recovering her but nonetheless 
remains preoccupied with her and vigilant for her return. Later 
still he seems ro lose his interest in his mother and to become 
emotionally detached from her." 

Bowlby goes on to describe what happens when the mother comes back: 

John Bowlby 1973b: "Nevertheless, provided the period of separation 
is not too prolonged, a child does not remain detached 
indefinitely. Sooner or later after being reunited with his mother 
his attachment to her emerges afresh. Thenceforward, for days or 
weeks, and sometimes for much longer, he insists on staying close 
to her. Furthermore, whenever he suspects he will lose her again 
he exhibits acute anxiety. . . . 

"The very derailed observations made by Jane Goodal! of 
chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream Reserve in central Africa show 
not only that anxious and distressed behavior on being separated, 
as reported of animals in captivity, occurs also in the wild but that 
distress at separation continues throughout chimpanzee childhood. 
. . . Not until young are four and a half years of age are any 
of them seen traveling not in the company of mother, and then 
only rarely." 

Also, it was discovered that when young children are deprived ol Imprint


ers for more than a few days, they often show signs of impairment for 

much longer times. 

John Bowlby iy73b: "From all these findings we can conclude 
with confidence not only that a single separation of no longer 
than six days at six months of age has perceptible effects two years 
later on rhesus infants, but that the effects of a separation are proportionate 
to its length. A thirteen-day separation is worse than 
a six-day; two six-day separations are worse than a single six-day 
separation."4 

To some, it may seem surprising that even badly mistreated children (and 


Sh THE EMOTION MACHINE 

monkeys) may remain attached to abusive Imprinters (Seay 1964), Perhaps 
this might not seem so strange in the light of Bowlby's claim that 
attachment depends on "the quickness with which the person responds, and 
the intensity of that interaction"-—because abusive persons also often excel 
in exactly those characteristics! 

We see similar behaviors in our various primate relatives—such as 
orangutans, gorillas, and chimpanzees—as well as in our more distant 
cousins, the monkeys. We should also note Harry Harlow's discovery that, 
given no other alternative, a monkey will become attached to an object 
that has no behavior at all, but still has some "comforting" characteristics. 
This would seem to confirm Bowlby's view that attachment does not stem 
rrom physiological needs—unless we amend this to include what Harlow 
calls "comfort contact. " (See Harlow 1958.) 

When the mother and child have more distance between them, they 
maintain their connection with a special "hoo" whimper to which the 
other promptly responds—as Jane Goodall (1968) herself reports: 

"When rhe infant [chimpanzee] . . . begins to move from its 
mother, it invariably utters this sound it it gets into any difficulty 
and cannot quickly return to her. Until the infants locomotion 
patterns are fairly well developed the mother normally responds 
by going to fetch it at once. The same sound is used by the mothet 
when she reaches to remove her infant from some potentially dangerous 
situation or even, on occasion, as she gestures it to cling on 
when she is ready to go. The 'hoo' whimper therefore serves as a 
fairly specific signal in reestablishing mother-infant contact." 

What happens in other animals? Early in the 1930s, Konrad Lorenz, a 
great observer of animals, found that a recently hatched chicken, duck, or 
goose will become "attached" to the first large moving object it sees, and 
will subsequently follow that object around. He called this "imprinting" 
because it occurs with such remarkable speed and permanence. Here are 
some ol his observations: 

Imprinting begins soon after hatching. 
The chick quickly starts to follow the moving object. 
The period for imprinting ends a few hours later. 
The effect of imprinting is permanent. 



ATTACHMENTS AND COALS S7 

To what kinds of objects do chicks get attached? Those moving objects 
are usually parents, but if the parents have been removed, then the object 
could be a cardboard box or a red balloon—or could even be Lorenz himself. 
Then, during the next two days, as the gosling follows its parents, It 
somehow learns to recognize them as individuals and not follow any other 
geese. Now when it loses contact with the mother, it will cease to feed or 
examine things, and instead will search and make piping sounds (like the 
"hoo" signals in Jane Goodal! s notes) as though distressed at being lost. 
Then the parent responds with a special sound—and Lorenz observes that 
this response must come quickly to establish imprinting. (Later this call 
is no longer required, but in the meantime it serves to protect the chick 
against becoming attached to an unsuitable object, such as the moving 
branch of a tree.) In any case, these types of birds can feed themselves soon 
after they hatch, so imprinting is independent of being fed. 

To what extent did human attachment-based learning evolve from 
older prehuman forms ot imprinting? Humans, of course, are different 
from birds, yet rite infants of both share some similar needs—and there 
may have been much earlier precursors of this; for example, Jack Horner 
(1998) has discovered that some dinosaurs constructed clusters of bird 
nesr—like structures. 

Returning to the human realm, we should ask how infants distinguish 
potential Imprinters. Although some researchers have reported that 
infants can recognize the mother's voice even before the time of birth, 
it is generally thought that newborns first learn mainly through touch, 
taste, and smell—and later distinguish the sound of a voice and react to 
the sight a face. One might assume that the latter depends on discerning 
such features as eyes, nose, and mouth, but there seems to be more to the 
story than that: 

Francesca Acerra 1999: "4-day-old neonates look longer at their 
mother's face than at a stranger's face—but not when the mother 
wears a scarf that hides the hair contour and die outer contour of 
the head." 

This suggests that those infants may react less to the features of the face, 
and more to its larger-scale, overall shape; it was not until two or three 
more months that Acerra's subjects were able to distinguish particular 
faces.'' This suggests that our visual systems may use different sets of 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

processes at different stages of development—and perhaps the ones that 
operate first serve mainly to attach the mother to her child! In any case, 
Konrad Lorenz was amazed by what his goslings failed to distinguish: 

Konrad Lorenz 1970: "The human imprinted gosling will 
unequivocally refuse to follow a goose instead of a human, but 
it will not differentiate between a petite, slender young girl and a 
big old man with a beard. .. . It is astounding that a bird reared 
by, and imprinted to, a human being should direct its behavior 
patterns not towards one human but towards the species Homo 
sapiens." 

(I do not find this to be so strange because all geese look so much the same 
to me.) Perhaps more significant is Lorenz's claim that adult sexual preference 
may be established at this early time, though it appears only much 
later in behavior, 

"A jackdaw for which the human has rep laced the parental companion, 
will thus direct its awakening sexual instincts not specifically 
towards its former parental companion, but. . . towards any one 
relatively unfamiliar human being. The sex is unimportant, but 
the object will quite definitely be human. It would seem that the 
former parental companion is simply not considered as a possible 
mate." 

Could such delays be relevant to human sexual preferences? Studies have 
shown that, after more contact, some of those birds will eventually mate 
with other members of their species. However, this still is a serious obstacle 
to repopulating endangered species, so now it is standard policy to 
minimize human contact with new chicks before they are released. 

All of this could help to explain why we evolved our extended infantile 
helplessness: children who too soon went off by themselves could not 
become wise enough to survive—and so, we had to extend the time during 
which those children were forced to learn from Imprinters. 

2-8 Who Are Our Imp rimers? 

A Jackdaw, seeing Doves in a place with much food, painted himself 
white to join them. The Doves, as long as he did not speak, 


ATTACHMENTS AND COALS 

assumed that he was another Dove and admitted him to their 
cote. Bur when one day he forgor not to speak, they expelled 
him because his voice was wrong—-and when he teturned to his 
Jackdaw tribe they expelled him because his color was wrong. So 
desiring two ends, he obtained neithet. 

—Aesop's Fables 

When do attachments begin and end? Even young infants soon statt to 
behave in distinctive ways when in their mothers' presence. However, it 
is usually not till near the first year's end that the child protests against 
separation, and begins to learn to become disturbed at a sign that his 
I mprimcr mtenas to depart—e.g., reaching for an overcoat. This is also the 
time when most children begin to show fears of unusual things. Both this 
tear of strange things and that fear of separation begin to decline in the 
child's third year—so that now the child can be sent to school. However, 
we do not sec the same decline in the roles of those other, self-conscious, 
attachment-based feelings. These persist for longer times and sometimes, 
perhaps, for the rest of our lives. 

John Bowlby 1973a: "During adolescence . . . other adults may 
come to assume an importance equal to or greater than that of the 
parents, and sexual attraction to age-mates begins to extend the 
picture. As a result individual variation, already great, becomes 
even greater. At one extreme are adolescents who cut themselves 
off from the parents; at the other are those who remain intensely 
attached and are unwilling or unable to direct their attachment 
behavior to others. Between the extremes lie the great majority 
of adolescents whose attachments to parents remain strong but 
whose ties to others are ol much importance also. For most individuals 
the bond to parents continues into adult life and affects 
behavior in countless ways. Finally in old age, when attachment 
behavior can no longer be directed to members of an older generation, 
or even the same generation, it may come instead to be 
directed towards members of a younger one." 

What happens in other animals? In those that do not remain in herds, 
attachment frequently persists only until the offspring can live by themselves. 
In many species it's different tor females; in many species the mother 
will actively drive the young ones away as soon as a new litter is horn 


THFEMOTIOrVMACHirNK 

(perhaps because of evolutionary selection against inbreeding)—while in 
other cases attachment will stay until the time of puberty or even later for 
females. Bowlby mentions a phenomenon that results from this: 

"In the female of ungulate species (sheep, deer, oxen, etc.), attachment 
to mother may continue until old age. As a result a flock of 
sheep, or a herd of deer, is built up of young following mother 
following grandmother following great grandmother and so 
on. Young males of these species, by contrast, break away from 
mother when they reach adolescence. Thenceforward they become 
attached to older males and remain with them all their lives except 
during the few weeks of each year of the rutting season." 

Of course, other species evolve different strategies that arc suited for different 
environments; for example, the size of the flock may depend on the 
character and prevalence of predators, etc. 

When does that imprinting period end? R. A. Hinde discovered that 
chicks like the ones that Lorenz observed eventually become fearful of 
unfamiliar moving things. This led Hinde to suggest that time for imprinting 
comes to a stop only when this new kind of fear forestalls any further 
"following." Similarly, many human babies show a long period of fear of 
strangers that begins near the start of the second year.6 

2-9 Self-Models and Self-Discipline 

To solve a hard problem, you must work out a plan—but then you need to 
carry it out; it wont help to have a multistep plan if you tend to quit before 
it is done. This means that you'll need some "self-discipline"—which in 
turn needs enough self-consistency that you can predict, to some extent, 
what you're likely to do in the future. We all know people who make clever 
plans but rarely manage to carry them out because their models of what 
they will actually do don't conform enough to reality. But how could a 
trillion-synapse machine ever become predictable? How did our brains 
come to manage themselves in the face of their own great complexity? The 
answer must be that we learn to represent things in extremely compact, 
yet useful ways. 

Thus, consider how remarkable ir is that we can describe a person 
with words. What makes us able to compress an entire personality into a 
short phrase like "Joan is tidy," or "Carol is smart," or "Charles tries to be 


ATTACHMEiNTS AND GOALS SI 

dignified"? Why should one person he generally neat, rather than be tidy 
in some ways and messy in others? Why should traits Hkc these exist? In 
Chapter 9-2: Personality Traits, we'll see some ways in which such things 
could come about: 

In the course of each person's development, we tend to evolve 
certain policies that seem so consistent that we (and our friends) 
can recognize them as features or traits—and we use these to build 
our self-images. Then when we try to formulate plans, we can use 
those traits to predict what we'll do (and to thus discard plans 
that we won't pursue). Whenever this works, we're gratified, and 
this leads us to further train ourselves to behave in accord with 
these simplified descriptions. Thus, over rime our imagined trairs 
proceed to make themselves more real. 

Of course, these self-images are highly simplified; we never come to know 
very much about our own mental processes, and what we call traits are 
only the seeming consistencies that we learn to use for describing ourselves. 
(See Chapter 9-2.) However, even these may be enough to help us 
conform to our expectations so that this process can eventually provide us 
with useful models of our own abilities. 

We all know the value of having friends who usually do what they 
say they will do. But it's even more useful to be able to trust yourself to 
do what you've asked yourself to do! And perhaps the simplest way to do 
that is to make yourself consistent with the caricatures that you've made 
of yourself—by behaving in accord with self-images described in terms of 
sets of traits. 

But how do those traits originate? Surely these can be partly genetic; 
we can sometimes perceive newborn infants to be more placid or more 
excitable. And, of course, some traits could be the chance results of developmental 
accidents. However, other traits seem more clearly acquired 
from contacts with one's Imprinters. 

Is there some risk in becoming attached to too many different personalities? 
If a child has only a single Imprimer—or several that share very 
similar values—it won't be too hard for that child to learn which behaviors 
will usually be approved. But what is likely to happen when a child 
acquires several Imprinters who have conflicting sets of ideals? That could 
lead to the child's attempting to model herself on several different sets 


THEKMOTlONMACHliNE 

of traits—which could impair her development, because a person with 
coherenr goals should usually do better than one encumbered by conflicting 
ones. Also, if you behave consistently, then, as we'll suggest in Chapter 
9-2, this can help make other persons feel that they can depend on you. 
Nevertheless, Chapter 9 will argue that we should not expect a person to 
form only a single, coherent self-image: in fact, we each construct multiple 
models of ourselves, and learn when it's useful to switch among them. 

In any case, if you changed your ideals too recklessly, you could never 
predict what we might want next: you would never be able to get much 
done if you could not "depend on yourself." However, on the other side, 
one needs to be able to compromise; it would be rash to commit to some 
long-range plan with no way to later back out of it. And it would be 
especially dangerous to change oneself in ways that prevent one from ever 
changing again. So it would seem that human beings find different ways 
to deal with this: some children end up with too many constraints, while 
other children adopt more ambitions than they will ever have time to 
implement. 

Also, our Imprimers may feel the need to prevent their devotees from 
attaching themselves to persons of "dubious character." Here is an instance 
in which a researcher had to become concerned with who might influence 
his machine! 

In the 1950s, Arthur Samuel, a computer designer at IBM, developed 
a program that learned to play checkers well enough to defeat 
several excellent human players. Its quality of play improved when 
it competed with its superiors. However, games against inferior 
players tended to make its performance get worse—so much that 
its programmer had to turn irs learning off. In the end, Samuel 
allowed his machine to play only against transcripts of masterclass 
championship games. 

We sometimes see this carried to extremes; consider how zealots recruit 
for their cults: they remove you from all your familiar locations and persuade 
you to break all your social attachments—including all your family 
ties. Then once you've been detached from your Iriends it becomes easy 
to sabotage all your defenses—and then you are ready to be imprinted 
by their local prophet, seer, or diviner, who has mastered some ways to 
implant new ideals into your anxious and insecure mind. 


ATTACH MEM'S AJVU COALS 

We face rhe same prospect in other realms. While your parents are 
concerned for your welfare, businesspersons may have more interest in 
promoting the wealth of their firms. Religious leaders may wish you well, 
yet be more concerned for their temples and sects. And when leaders 
appeal to your national pride, diey may also expect you to lay down your 
life to defend some ancient boundary line. Each organization has its own 
intentions, and uses its members to further them. 

Individualist: I hope you don't mean that literally. An organization 
is nothing more than the circle of persons involved with ir. It 
cannot have any goals of its own, but only those that its members 
hold. 

What could it mean when someone suggests that some system has an 
intention or goal? Chapter 6-3 will discuss some conditions in which a 
process could seem to have motives. 

2-10 Public Imprimers 

We've discussed how attachment-based learning might work when a child 
is close to an Imprinter—but this might also relate to what happens when 
someone "catches the public's eye" by appearing in broadcast media, A 
straightforward way to promote a product would be to present good evidence 
for its virtue or value. However, we often see "testimonials" that 
only claim that a certain "celebrity" person approves of it. Why would this 
method work so well to influence someone's personal goals? 

Perhaps part of the answer can be found by asking what factors might 
make those "celebrities" so popular. Attractive physical features may help, 
but also, most actors and singers have special skills: they are experts at 
feigning emotional states. Competitive athletes, too, are proficient deceivers—
as well as are most popular leaders. But perhaps the most effective 
technique could be based on knowing ways to make each listener feel 
a sense that "this important person is speaking to me." This would 
make listeners feel more involved and, accordingly, more compelled to 
respond—no matter that they are only hearing a monologue! 

Not everyone can control a mob. What techniques could one use to 
engage a very broad range of different minds? The popular term charisma 
has been defined to be "a rare personal quality attributed to leaders who 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

arouse popular devotion or enthusiasm. " When popular leaders mold our 
goals, could they be exploiting some special techniques through which 
they can establish rapid attachments? 

Politician: It usually helps for the speaker to have large stature, 
deep voice, and confident manner. However, although great 
height and bulk attract attention, some leaders have been diminutive. 
And while some powerful orators intone their words with 
deliberate measure, some leaders and preachers rant and shriek 
and still manage to grip our attention. 

Psychologist: Yes, but I see a problem with this. Earlier you mentioned 
that "speed and intensity of response" were important for 
making attachments. But when someone makes a public pronouncement, 
there is no room for those critical factors because 
the speaker cannot respond individually to each listener. 

Rhetoric can create that illusion. A well-paced speech can seem "interactive" 
by raising questions in listeners' minds—and then answering them 
at just the right time. You can do this by interacting, inside your mind, 
with some "simulated listeners"—so that at least some of your audience 
will feel that they got an attentive response, although there was no 
genuine dialogue. Another trick would be to pause just long enough to 
make listeners to feel that they ought to react—but not to give them 
quite enough time to think of objections to your messages. Finally, an 
orator does not need to control everyone in the audience-—because if 
you can recruit enough of them, then "peer pressure" may bring in the 
rest of them. 

Conversely, a crowd could take over control of a more sensitive and 
responsive person in charge. Listen to one great performer who tried to 
avoid the influence of his audience: 

Glenn Gould: "For me, the lack of an audience—the total anonymity 
of the studio—provides the greatest incentive to satisfy my 
own demands upon myself without consideration for, or qualification 
by, the intellectual appetite, or lack of it, on the part of the 
audience. My own view is, paradoxically, that by pursuing the most 
narcissistic relation to artistic satisfaction one can best fulfill the 
fundamental obligation of the artist of giving pleasure to others."7 


ATTACHMENTS AND COALS 

Finally, we also should note that a child could even become attached to 
an entity that doesn't exist—such as a person in some legend or myth, 
a fictional charactet in a book, or an imaginary animal. A person can 
even become attached to an abstract doctrine, dogma, or creed—or to 
an icon or image that represents it. Then those imagined entities could 
serve as "virtual mentots" inside their wotshippets' minds. After all, when 
you come right down to it, all our attachments ate made to fictions; you 
nevet connect to an actual person, but only to the models you've made to 
represent your conceptions of them. 

So far as I know, this theory of how impriming works is new, although 
Freud must have imagined some similar schemes. What kind of experiments 
could show wherhcr on not our brains use processes like this? New 
instruments that show events in brains might help, but experiments on 
human attachments might be deemed to be unethical. However, today we 
have an alternative: to write computer programs to simulate this. Then, 
if those programs behave in humanlike ways, this would show that out 
theory is plausible. But then, the computers might complain that we have 
not been treating them properly. 

This chapter addressed some questions about how people choose which 
goals to pursue. Some of our goals are instinctive drives that come with 
our generic inheritance, while others are subgoals that we learn (by trial 
and error) to accomplish goals that we already hold. As fot our higher-level 
goals, this chapter conjectured those are produced by special machinery 
that makes us adopt the values of the parents, friends, or acquaintances 
to whom we become "attached," because they respond actively to our 
needs—and thereby induce in us such "self-conscious" feelings as Shame 
and Pride. 

At first, those "Imprimers" must be near to us, but once we make 
"mental models" of them, we can use those models to "elevate" goals even 
when those Imprimers are absent—and eventually, these models become 
what we call conscience, ideals, or moral codes. Thus, attachments teach us 
ends, not means—-and thus impose our parents' dreams on us. 

We'll come back to this notion near the end of this book, but next 
we'll look more closely at the clusters of feelings that we know by names 
like Hurting, Grief and Suffering. 


3 


FROM PAIN TO 
SUFFERING 


3-1 Being in Pain 

Charles Darwin 1872: "Great pain urges all animals, and has 
urged them during endless generations, to make the most violent 
and diversified efforts to escape from the cause of suffering. Even 
when a limb or other separate part of the body is hurt, we often 
see a tendency to shake it, as if to shake off the cause, though this 
may obviously be impossible." 

What happens when you stub your toe? You've scarcely felt the impact yet, 
but you catch your breath and start to sweat—because you know what's 
coming next: a dreadful ache will tear at your gut; and ail other goals will 
be brushed away, replaced by your wish to escape from that pain. 

How could such a simple event distort all yout othet thoughts so 
much? What could make the sensation called "Pain" lead one into the 
state we call "Suffering"? This chapter proposes a theory for this: any pain 
will activate the goal "Get rid of that pain"—and achieving this will also 
make that goal go away. However, if that pain is intense and persistent 
enough, this will arouse yet other resources that tend to suppress your 
other goals—and if this grows into a large-scale "cascade," there won't be 
much left of the rest of your mind. 


FROM PAIN TO SUFFERING S7 


A SPBBADING CASCADE 

Of course, sometimes a pain is just a pain; if it doesn't last long or 
it's not too intense, then it won't escalate into suffering. Besides, you can 
usually muzzle a pain for a rime, by trying to think about something else. 
Sometimes you can even make it hurt less by thinking about the pain 
itself: just focus your attention on it, evaluate its intensity, and try to 
regard its qualities as interesting novelties. But this provides only a brief 
reprieve because, whatever diversions you rry, pain continues to gripe and 
complain, like a nagging, frustrated child; you can think about something 
else for a time, but will soon again be distracted to its demands. 

Daniel Dennett 1978: "If you can make yourself study your pains 
(even quite intense pains) you will find, as it wete, no room left 
to mind them: (they stop hurting). However, studying a pain 
(e.g., a headache) gets boring pretty fast, and as soon as you stop 
studying them, they come back and hurt, which, oddly enough, is 
sometimes less boring than being boted by them and so, to some 
degree, preferable." 

In any case, we should be thankful that pain evolved, because it protects our 
bodies from harm, first by making one try to remove its cause, and then by 
helping die injured part to rest and repair itself by keeping one from moving 
it. Here are some other ways in which pain protects us from injury. 

Pain makes you focus on the body parts involved. 
It makes it hard to think about anything else. 
Pain makes you move away from its cause. 
It makes you want that state to end, while teaching you, 


for future times, not to repeat the same mistake. 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Yet instead of being grateful for pain, people often complain about it. 
"Why are we cursed, "pain's victims ask, "with such unpleasant experiences?" 
And although we often think of pain and pleasure as opposites, they have 
many similar qualities: 

Pleasure often makes you focus on the body parts involved. 

It makes it hard to think about anything else. 

It makes you draw closer to its cause. 

It makes you want to maintain that state, while teaching you, 

for future times, to keep repeating the same "mistake." 

All this suggests that both pleasure and pain engage some of the same 
kinds of machinery; both constrict one's range of attention, both have 
connections with how we learn, and both reduce the priorities of almost 
all one's other goals. In view of these similarities, an alien from outer space 
might wonder why people like pleasure so much—yet display so little 
desire for pain. 

Alien: Why do you humans complain about pain? 

Human: We don't like pain because it hurts. 

Alien: Then explain to me what "hurting" is. 

Human: Hurting is simply the way pain feels bad. 

Alien: Then please tell me what you mean by "feels bad." 

At this point the human might insist that feelings are so basic and elemental 
that there simply is no way to explain them to someone who has not 
experienced them. 

Dualist philosopher: Science can explain a thing only in terms of 

other, yet simpler things. But subjective feelings like pleasure or 

pain cannot be reduced to smaller parts. 

However, in Chapter 9 I'll argue that feelings are not basic at all, but are 
processes made of many parts—and that once we recognize their complexity, 
this will help us find ways to explain what feelings arc and how 
they work. 


FROM PAJM 1X1 SUFFERING 69 

3-2 How Does Pain Lead to Suffering? 

We often speak of Hurting, Pain, and Suffering as though they were more 
or less the same, and differ mainly in degree. However, white the effects of 
transient discomforts are brief, the longer that Pain remains intense, the 
longer those cascades will continue to grow, and your efforts to think will 
deteriorate—so that goals that seemed easy in normal times get increasingly 
harder to achieve, as more resources become disturbed or suppressed. 
Then we use words tike Suffering, Anguish, and Torment to describe what 
happens when persistcnr pain comes to disrupt so many other parts of 
your mind that you can barely think about anything but how this condition 
is impairing you. 

"I'm so something that I can't remember what it's called.'' 
—Miles Steele (age 5) 


In other words, it seems to me that a major component of Suffering is rhe 
frustration that comes with the loss of your options; it is as though most 
of your mind has been stolen Irom you, and your awareness of this only 
makes things seem worse. For example, I have heard Suffering likened to a 
balloon that keeps dilating inside ones mind until there's no more room 
for its usual thoughts. This image suggests, among other things, that one 
has lost so much "freedom of choice" that one has become a prisoner. 
Here are a few of the sorrows that come when Suffering imprisons us: 

Anguish of losing mobility 

Resentment of not being able to think 

Dread of becoming disabled and helpless 

Shame of becoming a burden to friends 

Remorse at dishonoring obligations 

Dismay at the prospect of failure 

Mortification of seeming abnormal 

Horror and fear of impending dearh 

Of course, we also lose some "freedom of choice" when we get into any 
particular mental state, because then we're constrained by the goals that 
accompany it. We never have enough time to do all the things we want to 
do—and every new idea or ambition is sure to conflict with some previous 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

ones. Most times, we don't mind those conflicts much, because we feel 
that we're still in control—partly because we usually know that if we do 
not like the result, we stili can go back and try something else. 

However, whenever an aching Pain breaks in, all our projects and plans 
get thrust aside, as though by an external force—and then all we have left are 
desperate schemes for finding ways to escape from the Pain. Pain's imperatives 
can serve us well when they help us to deal with emergencies—but 
when a pain cannot be relieved, it can turn into a catastrophe. 

The primary function of Pain is to compel one to remove what is 
causing it—but in doing so, it tends to disrupt most of a person's 
other goals. Then, if this results in a large-scale cascade, we use 
words like Anguish or Suffering to describe what remains of its 
victim's mind. 

Indeed, Suffering can affect you so much that your friends may see you 
as being replaced by a different personality. It may even make you cry out 
and beg for help, as though you've regressed to becoming an infant again. 
Of course, you may still seem the same to yourself, because you have the 
sense of still having access to the same memories and abilities—although 
they no longer seem of much use to you. 

"Life is full of misery, loneliness, and suffering—and it's all over 
much too soon." 
—Woody Alien 

3-3 The Machinery of Suffering 

"The restless, busy nature of the world, this, I declare, is at die 
root of patn. Attain that composure of mind, which is resting in 
the peace of immortality. Self is but a heap of composite qualities, 
and its world is empty like a fantasy" 

—Buddha 

Here is an example of what can happen when a person becomes a victim 
of pain: 

Yesterday Joan picked up a heavy box, and today there's a terrible 
pain in her knee. She's been working on an important report, 


FROM PAIN TO SUFFERING

which she has to present at a meeting tomorrow. "But if this keeps 
up" she hears herself think, "1 won't be able to take that trip." She 
decides to visit her medicine shelf to get a pill that might bring 
some relief—but a stab of pain stops her from getting up. Joan 
clutches her knee, catches her breath, and tries to think about 
what to do next-—but the pain so overwhelms her that she cannot 
focus on anything else. 

"Get rid of me," Joan's pain insists—but how does Joan know that it comes 
from her knee? Each person is born equipped with nerves that connect 
from each part of the skin to several different "maps" in the brain, such as 
this one in the sensory cortex, as depicted here.1 


However, we are not born with similar ways to represent signals that 
come from our internal organs, and this could be why we find it hard to 
describe those pains that are not located near our skin; presumably, no 
such maps evolved because we would have had little use for them. For 
before the advent of modern surgery, we had no way to repair or protect 
a damaged liver or pancreas except by guarding one's entire belly, so all 
one needed to know was that one was having a bellyache. Similarly, we 
had no remedies that applied to specific places inside our brains, so ir 
would not have helped to recognize rhat a pain came from one's cortex 
or thalamus. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

As for the sense of Pain itself, our scientists know quite a lot about the 
first few events that result when a part of the body is traumatized: here is 
a typical attempt to describe what happens after that: 

Pain begins when special nerves react to pressure, cold, heat, etc., 
or to chemicals released by injured cells. Then the signals from 
those nerves rise up through the spinal cord to the thalamus, 
which relays them to other parts ofyour brain—in ways that seem 
to involve hormones, endorphins, and neurotransmitters. Eventually, 
some of those signals reach your limbic system, and this 
results in emotions like Sadness, Anger, and Frustration. 

However, to understand how Pain can then lead to changes in our mental 
states, it doesn't much help to know only where various functions take 
place in the brain; we would also need to know what each one of those 
regions of the brain does—and how its processes interact with the other 
parts that are connected to it. Are any particular parts of the brain in 
charge of our hurting and suffering? Apparently so, to some extent, as 
cautiously noted by Ronald Melzack and Patrick Wall, who pioneered 
theories of how Pain works: 

Melzack and Wall 1965: "An area within the functionally complex 
anterior cingulate cortex has a highly selective role in pain processing, 
consistent with an involvement in the characteristic emotional/ 
motivational component {unpleasantness and urgency) of pain." 

But then those authors go on to point out that pain also involves many 
regions of the brain: 

"The concept [of a pain center] is pure fiction unless virrually 
the whole brain is considered to be the 'pain center,' because the 
thalamus, the limbic system, the hypothalamus, the brain stem 
reticular formation, the parietal cortex, and the frontal cortex are 
all implicated in pain perception," 

Perhaps we'll find more clues about how suffering works by studying a rare 
condition that results from injuring certain parts of the brain: the victims 
of Pain Asymbolia. still recognize what the rest of us describe as pain—but 


FKOM PAIN TO SUFFERING 

do not find those feelings unpleasant, and may even laugh in response to 
them—which suggests that these patients have lost some resources that 
normally cause those cascades of torments. 

In any case, to understand what suffering is, it won't suffice merely to 
(earn where its machinery is; what we really need are better ideas about 
how those processes relate to our highest-level values, goals, and mental 
models of ourselves: 

Daniel Dennett 1978: "Real pain is bound up with the struggle 
to survive, with the real prospect of death, with rhe afflicrions of 
our soft and fragile and warm flesh. . . . There can be no denying 
(though many have ignored it) that our concept of pain is inextricably 
bound up with (which may mean something less strong 
than essentially connected with) our ethical intuitions, our senses 
of suffering, obligation, and evil." 

Physical vs. Mental "Pain" 

Are mental and physical pains the same? Suppose that you were to hear 
Charles say, / felt so anxious and upset that it felt as if something was tearing 
my gut." You might conclude that Charles's feelings reminded him of 
times when he had a stomachache. 

Physiologist: It might even be true that your "stomach crawled"— 
if your mental condition caused your brain to send signals to your 
digestive tracr. 

Why do we so often speak as though "hurt feelings" resemble physical 
pains, although they have such different origins? Is there anything similar 
between the physical pain of a stomachache and the distress caused by 
disrespect from a friend? Yes, because, although these start with different 
kinds of events, being rejected by one's peers can eventually disrupt your 
brain in much the same way as can an abdominal pain. 

Student: As a child, I once hit my head on a chair, so I covered 
the injury with my hand. At first the pain was not intensive, but 
as soon as 1 noticed some blood on my hand, my suffering seemed 
to become much worse. 


THE EMOTION MACHINK 

Presumably, the sight of blood does not affect the pain's intensity, but 
helps to engage higher-level activities. We undergo similar kinds of large-
scale cascades in all sorts of situations like these: 

The grief of losing a long-term companion 

The helplessness of seeing others in pain 

The frustration of trying to stay awake 

The ache of humiliation or embarrassment 

The distraction that comes with excessive stress 

Feeling, Hurting, and Suffering 

"As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like 

a knife and made each delicate fiber of his nature quiver. His eyes 

deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears. He 

felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart." 

—Oscar Wilde, in The Picture of Dorian Gray 

We have many words for types of Pain—like stinging, throbbing, piercing, 
shooting, gnawing, burning, aching, and so on. But words never capture 
quite enough of what any particular feeling is, so we have to resort to 
analogies that try to describe what each feeling is like—such as "a knife" 
or "a hand of ice"—or images of a suffering person's appearance. Dorian 
Gray felt no physical pain, but was horrified about growing old—hideous, 
wrinkled, and worst of all, of having his hair lose its beautiful gold. 

But what makes feelings so hard to described Is this because feelings are 
so simple and basic that there's nothing more to be said about them? On 
the contrary, it seems to me that what we call "feelings" arc what result 
from our attempts to describe our whole mental states—no matter that 
every such state is so complex that any brief description of it can capture 
just a few aspects of it. Consequently, the best we can do is to recognize 
some ways in which our present state is similar to or differs from some 
other states that we recollect. In other words, because our mental states are 
so complex, we can describe them only in terms of analogies. 

Nevertheless, it can be easy to recognize (as opposed to describe) a particular 
feeling or mental condition because you may only need to detect a 
few of its characteristic features. This allows us to tell our friends enough 
about how we presently feel, because (assuming that both minds have 


FROM I'AIM TO SUKl'ERING

somewhat similar structures) just a few clues may be enough for one person 
to recognize the other's condition. And in any case, most people know 
that this kind of communication or '"empathy" is open to error as well as 
deception. 

All this raises questions about what distinctions we are trying to make 
between what we call "Pain," "Hurting," and "Suffering," People sometimes 
use those terms as though they only distinguish intensities—but here 
I'll use "Pain" for sensations that arrive quickly after an injury, and use 
"Hurting" for what happens when this elevates the goal to get rid of the 
pain. Finally, 1 will use "Suffering" for the states that result when this escalates 
into a large-scale cascade that disrupts all ones usual Ways to Think, 

Philosopher: 1 agree that pain can lead to many kinds of changes 
in a person's mind, but that doesn't explain how suffering feels. 
Why can't all that machinery work without making people feel 
so bad? 

It seems to me tliat when people talk about "feeling bad" they are referring 
to the disruption of their other goals, and to the various conditions that 
result from this. Pain would not serve the functions fot which it evolved if 
it allowed us to keep pursuing our usual goals while our bodies were being 
destroyed. But if too much of the rest of the mind were suppressed, we 
might be unable to think of adequate ways to get rid of the pain—so we 
need to keep active some, at least, of our higher-level abilities. However, if 
we can still reflect on ourselves, then we are likely to get into the sorts of 
conditions called Remorse, Dismay, and Fear—all of which can be aspects 
of Suffering. 

Philosopher: Isn't there still something missing here? You have 
described a lot of processes that might be going on in our brains— 
but you have not said anything about why those conditions should 
give rise to any feelings at all. Why can't all that just happen without 
our having any sense of "experiencing" them? 

Many philosophers have been puzzled by this mystery of why we have 
those "subjective experiences." I think that I have a good explanation for 
this, but it needs so many other ideas that we'll have to postpone it till 
Chapter 9. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

3-4 Overriding Pain 

Sonja: "To love is to suffer. To avoid suffering one must not love. 
But then one suffers from not loving. Therefore, to love is to suffer; 
not to love is to suffer; to suffer is to suffer. To be happy is 
to love. To be happy, then, is to suffer, but suffering makes one 
unhappy. Therefore, to be happy one must love or love to suffer 
or suffer from too much happiness." 

—Woody Allen, in Love and Death 

Some reactions to Pain are so brief that they're finished before one knows 
that they are happening. If Joan happens to touch something hot, her arm 
will quickly jerk her hand away before she's had time to think about it. But 
Joan's reflexes cannot move her away from the pain in her knee because it 
follows her everywhere she goes. By forcing one to focus on it, a persistent 
pain can interfere with one's thinking of ways to get rid of it. 

Of course, if Joan urgently wants to cross that room, she can probably 
do it "in spite of the pain"—at the risk of further injury. Thus, professional 
boxers and football players can train themselves to tolerate blows that are 
likely to damage their bodies and brains. How do they manage to override 
pain? We each know some methods for doing this and, depending on the 
culture we're in, we regard some such techniques to be commendable but 
others to be unacceptable. 

"About that time, G. Gordon Liddy began a new exercise in will 
power. He would burn his left arm with cigarettes, then matches 
and candles to train himself to overcome pain. . . . Years later, 
Liddy assured an acquaintance that he would never be forced to 
disclose anything he did not choose to reveal. He asked her to 
hold out a lit lighter. Liddy put his hand in the flame and held it 
there until the smell of burning flesh caused his friend to pull the 
flame away." 

—Larry Taylor1 

If you keep your mind involved with other things, then a pain may seem 
to feel less intense. We all have heard anecdotes in which a wounded soldier 
continues to fight without being disrupted by pain—and only later 
succumbs to shock, after the battle is lost or won. Thus, a powerful goal 


FROM PAIN TO SUFFERING

to save yourself, or to save your friends, may be able to override everything 
else. On a smaller scale, with a milder pain, you may simply be too busy ro 
notice it; then the pain may still "be there" but cannot get enough priority 
to disrupt yout other activities. 

Shakespeare reminds us (in King Lear) that misery loves company: no 
matter how awful ones lot may be, we still may draw comfort from knowing 
that the same could happen to someone else. 

When we our betters see bearing our woes, 
We scarcely think our miseries our foes. 
Who alone suffers suffers most i'th' mind, 
Leaving free things and happy shows behind; 
But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip 
When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship. 
How light and portable my pain seems now, 
When that which makes me bend makes the King bow. 


Another way to deal with pain is to apply a "counterirritant": when a certain 
part of your body aches, it sometimes helps to rub or pinch that spot—or to 
aggravate some different place. But why should a second disturbance offset 
the fiist, instead of simply making things worse? (See Melzack 1993.) A 
simple theory of this might be that when there are multiple sources of pain, 
it is hard for the rest of the btain to choose which of these sources to focus 
on. That could make it difficult for a single cascade to continue to grow. 

Many other processes can alter how pain can affect our behavior: 

Aaron Sloman 1996: "Some mental states involve dispositions, 
which in particular contexts would be manifested in behavior, 
and if the relevant behavior does not occur then an explanation is 
needed (as with a person who is in pain not wincing or showing 
the pain or taking steps to reduce it). The explanation may be that 
he has recently joined some stoic-based religious cult, or that he-
wants to impress bis girl friend, etc." 

This applies to the treatment of pain-ridden people. 

Marian Osterweis 1987: "The degree of awareness of one's own 
pain may vary from a near denial of its presence to an almost total 


~8 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

preoccupation with it, and the reasons for attending to pain may 
vary. Pain itself may become the focus of the self and self-identity, 
or may, however uncomfortable, be viewed as tangential to personhood. 
One of the most powerful influences on the way in which 
symptoms are perceived and the amount ol attention paid to them 
is the meaning attributed to those symptoms." 

Finally, in Chapter 9, we'll discuss the seeming paradox implied by the 
many common activities, such as in competitive sports, or in training for 
strength, in which one tries to do things beyond one's reach—because 
then, the greater the pain, then the higher the score. 

Prolonged and Chronic Suffering 

When an injured joint becomes swollen and sore, and the slightest touch 
causes fiery pain, it's no accident that we call it "inflamed." As we noted 
in Section 3-1, this can be a benefit, by leading you to protect that site, 
thus helping that injury to heal. However, it is hard to defend the dreadful 
effecrs of those other, chronic pains that never end. Then we tend to ask 
questions like, "What did I do to deserve this?"T\\tn if we can find something 
that justifies punishment, it may bring us relief to be able to think, 

"Now I can see why it serves me right!" 

Many victims discover no such escapes, and find that much has been 
lost from theit lives; some even decide to end their lives. However, some 
others find ways to regatd their sufferings as incentives or opportunities to 
show what they can accomplish, or even as unexpected gifts to help them 
to cleanse or renew their characters. 

F. M. Lewis 1982: "Becoming an invalid can be a blow to a persons 
self-esteem. Howevet, for some patients, the sick role is seen as 
an elevation in status—deserving the nurturance and concern of 
others. The ability to assign meaning to an illness or to symptoms 
has been found to enhance some patients' sense of self-mastery 
over a problem or crisis." 
Thus, some of those victims find ways to adapt to chronic, intractably 
painful conditions. They work out new ways to make themselves think 
and they rebuild their lives around those techniques. Here is how Oscar 


FROM PA1N TO SUFFERING

Wilde describes how he dealt with the misery of his imprisonment in 
Reading Gaol: 

Wilde 1905: "Morality does not help me. I am one of those who 
are made for exceptions, not for laws. Religion does not help me. 
The faith that others give to what is unseen, I give to what one can 
touch, and look at. Reason does not help me. It tells me that the 
laws undei which I am convicted, and the system under which I 
have suffered are wrong and unjust. But, somehow, I have got to 
make both of these things just and right to me. I have got to make 
everything that has happened to me good fot me. The plank bed, 
the loathsome food, the hard ropes, the harsh orders, rhe dreadful 
dress that makes sorrow grotesque to look at, the silence, the solitude, 
the shame—each and all of these things I had to transform 
into a spiritual experience. There is not a single degradation of 
the body which I must not try and make into a spiritualizing of 
the soul." 

Recent research on pain relief has developed new techniques, first for 
assessing degrees of pain and then lor successfully treating it. We now have 
drugs that can sometimes suppress some of pain's most cruel effects—but 
many still never find relief, either by mental or medical means. It seems 
fair to complain that, in this realm, evolution has not done wei) for us— 
and this must frusttate theologians: Why are people made to suffer so much? 
What functions could such suffering serve? 

Perhaps one answer to this is that the bad effects of chronic pain did 
not evolve from selection at all, but simply atose from a "programming 
bug." The cascades that we call "Suffering" must have evolved from earlier 
schemes that helped us to limit our injuries-—by providing the goal of 
escaping from pain with an extremely high priority. The resulring disruption 
of other thoughts was only a small inconvenience before our ancestors 
evolved new, vaster intellects. In other words, our ancient reactions to 
chronic pains have nor yet been adapted to be compatible with the reflective 
thoughts and fatsighted plans that only later evolved in our brains. 
Evolution never had any sense of how a species might evolve next—so it 
did not anticipate how pain might disrupt our future high-level abilities. 
And thus, we came to evolve a design that protects our bodies but ruins 
our minds. 


THK AMOTION MACHINK 

Grief 

I cannot weep, for all my body's moisture 
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart; 
Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burden, 
For self-same wind that I should speak withal 
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast, 
And burns me up with flames that tears would quench. 
To weep is to make less the depth of grief. 
Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me! 


—Shakespeare, in Henry VI, Part 3 

When you suffer the loss of a long-time friend, you feel that you've lost a 
part of yourself, because so many parts of your mind depend on that sharing 
of dreams and ideas—and now, alas, the signals that those brain parts 
transmit will never again receive replies. This is just like losing a hand or 
an eye—and that could be why it takes so much time to come to terms 
with being deprived of resources that you could rely on before that loss. 

Gloucester: Be patient, gentle Nell; forget this grief. 
Duchess: Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself! 
—Shakespeare, in Henry VI, Part 2 


Nell can't comply with Gloucester's advice because her links of affection 
are widely dispersed, rather than stored in some single place that she could 
select and then quickly erase. Besides, she may not wish to forget them all, 
as Aristotle suggests in Rhetoric: 

"Indeed, it is always the first sign of love, that besides enjoying 
someone's presence, we remember him when he is gone, and feel 
pain as well as pleasure, because he is there no longer. Similarly, 
there is an element of pleasure even in mourning and lamentation 
for the departed. There ts grief, indeed, at his loss, but pleasure 
in remembering him and, as it were, seeing him before us in his 
deeds and in his file." 

Here Shakespeare shows how we embrace our griefs and squeeze them till 
they take on pleasing shapes: 


FK0M PAIN TO SUFFERING 

Grief fills the room up of my absent child, 

Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me, 

Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words, 

Remembers me of all his gracious parrs, 

Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form; 

Then have 1 reason to be fond of grief, 

—Shakespeare, in King John 

3-5 Mental Correctors, Suppressors, and Censors 

"Don't pay any attention to the critics. Don't even ignore them." 
—Sam Goldwyn 

Joan's sore knee has been getting worse. Now it hurts her all the time, even 
when it isn't touched. She thinks, "I shouldn't have tried to pick up that 
box. And I should have put ice on my knee at once." 

It would be great never to make a mistake, or to get an idea that's not 
perfectly right—but we all make errors and oversights, not only in the 
physical realm but also in social and mental realms. However, although our 
decisions are frequently incorrect, it truly is remarkable bow rarely these 
lead to catastrophes. Joan seldom sticks things in her eye. She scarcely ever 
walks into walls. She never tells strangers how ugly they are. How much of 
a person's competence is based on knowing which actions not to take? 

We usually think of a person's abilities in positive terms, as in, "An 
expert is someone who knows what to do." But one could rake the opposite 
view, that "An expert is someone who rarely slips up—because of knowing 
what not to do." However, this subject was rarely discussed in twentieth-
century psychology—except, perhaps most notably, in Sigmund Freud's 
analyses. 

Perhaps that neglect was inevitable, because, in the early 1900s, many 
psychologists became "behaviorists," who trained themselves to think only 
about the physical actions that people do, while ignoring questions about 
what people do not do. The result of this was to ignore what Chapter 6 
will call "negative expertise"-—which, I suspect, is a very large part of every 
persons precious collection of commonsense knowledge. In other words, 
much of what we come to know is based on learning from our mistakes. 

To explain how our negative expertise works, I'll conjecture that our 
minds accumulate resources that we shall call "Critics"—each of which 


THK EMOTION MACH INK 

learns to recognize some particular kind of potential mistake. I'll assume that 
everyone possesses at least these three different types of Critics: 

A Corrector declares that you are doing something dangerous. 

"You must stop right now, because you're moving your hand toward 
a flame." 

A Suppressor interrupts before you begin the action you're planning 
to take. "Don't start to move your hand toward that flame, lest 
it get burned." 

A Censor acts yet earlier, to prevent that idea from occurring to 
you—so you never even consider the option of moving your hand 
in that direction. 

A Correctors warning may come too late, because the action is already 
going on; a Suppressor can stop it before it begins—but both can slow you 
down by taking some time. In contrast, a Censor can actually speed you 
up, by keeping you from considering the activities that it prohibits. This 
could be one reason why experts are sometimes so quick; they don't even 
conceive of those wrong things to do. 

Student: How could a Censor prevent you from thinking of 
something before you have started to think about it? Isn't that 
some kind of paradox? 

Programmer: No problem. Design each Censor to be a machine 
that is equipped with enough memory that it can remember the 
way you were thinking several steps before you made a certain 
particular kind of mistake. Then later, when that Censor recognizes 
a similar state, it steers you to think in some different way so 
that you then won't repeat that mistake. 

Of course, excessive cautiousness could have bad effects. If your Critics 
tried to prevent you from making every conceivable type of mistake, you 
might become so conservative that you would never try to do anything 
new. You might never be able to cross a street, because you could always 
conceive of some way you could meet with some accident. On the other 


EKOM PAIN TO SUFFERING 

side, it would be dangerous to not have enough Critics, because then you 
would make too many mistakes. So here we'll briefly talk about what 
might happen when we switch between these two extremes. 

Whal Happens When Too Many Critics Get Switched? 

I have of late—but wherefore I know not—-lost all my mirth, 
forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with 
my disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a 
sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, 
this brave o'crhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with 
golden fire, why, it appeareth nothing to me but a foul and pestilent 
congregation of vapors. 

—Shakespeare, in Hamlet 

In later chapters we'll argue that much of our human resourcefulness 
comes from our ability to switch among different Ways to Think. However, 
this could also be the source of many of the conditions we call our 
tempers, moods, and dispositions—as well as our many and varied mental 
disorders. For example, if certain Critics were to stay active all the 
time, then one would appear to be obsessed with certain aspects of the 
world or oneself-—or else one might constantly seem to be compelled to 
repeat certain kinds of activities. Another example of poor Critic control 
would be when one repeatedly turns too many Critics on, and later 
switches too many off. Here is what appears to be a firsthand description 
of such a condition: 

Kay Redfield Jamison 1994: "The clinical reality of manic-depressive 
illness is far more lethal and infinitely more complex than 
the current psychiatric nomenclature, bipolar disorder, would 
suggest. Cycles of fluctuating moods and energy levels serve as 
a background to constantly changing thoughts, behaviors, and 
feelings. The illness encompasses the extremes of human experience. 
Thinking can range from florid psychosis, or "madness," 
to patterns of unusually clear, fast and creative associations, to 
retardation so profound that no meaningful mental activity can 
occur. Behavior can be frenzied, expansive, bizarre, and seductive, 
or it can be seclusive, sluggish, and dangerously suicidal. Moods 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

may swing erratically between euphoria and despair or irritability 
and desperation. . , . [But] the highs associated with mania are 
generally only pleasant and productive during the earlier, milder 
stages." 

A later paper by Jamison goes on to suggest that some value can come 
from those massive cascades: 

Kay Redfield Jamison 1995: "It seems, then, that both the quantity 
and quality of thoughts build during hypomania. This speed 
increase may range from a very mild quickening to complete psychotic 
incoherence. It is not yet clear what causes this qualitative 
change in mental processing. Nevertheless, this altered cognitive 
state may weil facilitate the formation of unique ideas and associations. 
. . . Where depression questions, ruminates and hesitates, 
mania answers with vigor and certainty. The constant transitions 
in and out of constricted and then expansive thoughts, subdued 
and then violent responses, grim and then ebullient moods, withdrawn 
and then outgoing stances, cold and then fiery states—and 
the rapidity and fluidity of moves through such contrasring experiences—
can be painful and confusing. 

It is easy ro recognize such extremes in the mental illnesses called "bipolar" 
disorders, but I suspect that everyone constantly uses such processes tn 
the course of their everyday commonsense thinking! Thus, Chapter 7 will 
suggest that, whenever you face a new type of problem, you might find 
solutions by using procedures like this: 

First, briefly shut most of your Critics off. This helps you to think 
of some things you could do—with little concern about whether 
they'll work—as though you were in a brief "manic" state. 

Next, turn many Critics on, to examine these options more skep


tically—as though you were having a mild depression. 

Finally, choose an option that seems promising, and then proceed 
to pursue it, until one of your Critics starts to complain that you 
have stopped making progress. 


I-ROM PAIN TO SUFFERING SS 

Sometimes you may go though such phases deliberately, perhaps spending 
several minutes on each. However, my conjecture is that we often do this 
on timescaJes of one or two seconds, or less, in the course of our everyday 
commonsense thinking. But then, all these events may be so brief that we 
have almost no sense that they're happening. 

The "Critic-Selector Model of Mind" 

Chapter 1 described an animal as little more than a system based on a 
catalog of If-* Do rules, where each ./jf describes a type of physical situation, 
and its Do describes a useful way to react to it. 


Chapter 7 will extend this to what I will call the "Critic-Selector Model 
of Mind," which portrays our thinking as based on mental reactions to 
mental situations. In this model, our Critics play a central role in making 
large-scale changes in how we think, by selecting resources we'll use for 
thinking about different kinds of situations. Here is a simplified version 
of this: 


Each of these Critics learns to recognize some particular kind of mental 
condition so that whenever that condition occurs, this Critic will try to 
activate one or more sets of resources that have been useful, in the past, for 
dealing with that type of mental situation. 


THE EMOTION MAC HIM: 


A CRITIC SELECTING A SET OF RESOURCES 

Chapter 7-3 will suggest more ideas about how these resources are 
formed and organized. 

Student: Where would those Critics reside in my brain? Would 

they all be located in the same place, or would each part of the 

brain have some of its own? 

Our Critic-Selector Model of Mind will include structures like these at 
every level, so that each person's mind will include reactive, deliberative, 
and reflective Critics. At the lowest levels, those Critics and Selectors 
are almost the same as the Ifs and Thens of simple reactions. But at our 
higher reflective levels, these Critics and Selectors can cause so many 
changes that, in effect, they switch us to different Ways to Think. (See 
Singh 2003b.) 

I should note that the word Critic is often restricted to mean a person 
who only detects deficiencies. However, it also is useful to recognize when 
a strategy works better than we expected—and then to bestow more priority, 
time, or energy to the process that deserves credit for this. So, Chapter 
7-2 will extend the term Critic to include resources that not only detect 
mistakes but also recognize successes and promising opportunities; we'll 
call those "positive" critics "Encouragers. " 

3-6 The Freudian Sandwich 

Luck's a chance, but trouble's sure, 

I'd face it as a wise man would, 

and train for ill and not for good. 

—A . E. Housman 


FROM l',\IN TO SUFFERING

Few textbooks of psychology discuss how we decide what not to think 
about. However, this was a major concern to Sigmund Freud, who envisioned 
the mind as a system in which ideas need to overcome barriers. 

Sigmund Freud 1920: "[The mind includes] a large anteroom 
in which the various mental excitations are crowding upon one 
another, like individual beings. Adjoining this is a second, smaller 
apartment, a sort of reception-room, in which consciousness 
resides. Bur on the threshold between the two there stands a personage 
with the office of doorkeeper, who examines the various 
mental excitations, censors them, and denies them admittance 
to the reception-room when he disapproves of them. You will 
see at once that it does not make much difference wherher the 
doorkeeper turns any one impulse back at the threshold, or 
drives it out again once it has entered the reception-room. That 
is merely a matter of the degree of his vigilance and promptness 
in recognition." 

However, getting past this first barrier is not quite enough to make us 
reflect on a possible thought—or what Freud calls a mental excitation— 
because, as he goes on to say, this leads only to the reception room: 

"The excirations in the unconscious, in the antechamber, are not 
visible to consciousness (which is in the other room), so, to begin 
with, they remain unconscious. When they have pressed forward 
to the threshold and been turned back by the doorkeeper, they are 
'incapable of becoming conscious'; we call t-hem then repressed. 
But even those excitations which arc allowed over the threshold 
do not necessarily become conscious; they can only become so 
if they succeed in attracting the eye of consciousness." 

Thus, Freud imagined the mind as an obstacle course in which only ideas 
that get far enough are awarded the status of consciousness. In one kind 
of block (which Freud calls "repression"), an impulse is blocked at an early 
stage—without the thinker becoming aware of this. However, repressed 
ideas can still persist—and may be expressed in elusive disguises—by 
changing the manner in which they're described (so that the Censors no 
longer can recognize them). Freud used the term sublimation for this, 


KS THKKMOTIOINMACHIM. 

but we sometimes call this "rationalizing." Finally, an idea can reach the 
highest level and still be rendered powerless, although one can remember 
rejecting it (Freud names rhis process "repudiation.") 

More generally, Freud suggests that the human mind is like a battleground 
in which many resources are working at once—but don't always 
share the same purposes. Instead, there often arc serious conflicts between 
our animal instincts and our acquired ideals. Then the rest of the mind 
must either find ways to compromise or else to suppress some of those 
competitors. 


THE FREUDIAN SANDWICH 

It is more than a century since Sigmund Freud recognized that 
human thinking does not proceed in any single, uniform way. Instead, 
he saw each mind as a host of diverse activities that often lead to conflicts 
and inconsistencies—-and he saw that our various ways to deal with 
these involve many different processes, which in everyday life we try to 
describe with vague suitcase-like names such as Conscience, Emotion, and 
Consciousness. 

3-7 Controlling Our Moods and Dispositions 

"Love, he believed, made a fool of a man, and his present emotion 
was not folly bur wisdom; wisdom sound, serene, well-directed. 
. . . She seemed to bim so felicitous a product of nature and circumstance 
that his invention, musing on future combinations, 


[•ROM PAIN TO SUITERINC 

was constantly catching its breath with the fear of stumbling into 
some brutal compression or mutilation of her beautiful personal 
harmony. ... " 

—Henry James, in The American 

Chapter 1-2 described how our feelings and attitudes frequently swing 
between extremes: 

"Sometimes a person gets into a state where everything seems to 
be cheerful and bright—although nothing outside has actually 
changed. Other times everything pleases you less: the entire world 
seems dreary and dark, and your friends complain that you seem 
depressed." 

We use terms like dispositions and moods to refer to these kinds of conditions, 
in which we change the subjects we think about, and the ways in 
which we think about them. At first one may think about physical things, 
then about some social matters, and then one may start to reflect on one's 
longer-term goals and plans. But what determines the length of time that 
a person will stay in each such frame of mind, before switching to some 
other concern? 

A flash of anger, fear, or a sexual image may last for only an instant, 
while other moods can last for minutes or hours—and some may continue 
for weeks or years. "John is angry" means that he's angry now—but 
'Lan angry kind of person" may describe a lifelong trait. On what do these 
durations depend? Perhaps this partly depends on how our mental Critics 
are managed. 

Clearly, some of our Critics are always on the job, like voyeurs that 
constantly monitor us, waiting for moments to set off alarms—whereas 
other Critics are only active on special occasions, or in particular states of 
mind. Let's look again at two extremes: 

If you could switch all your Critics off, then nothing would seem 
to have any faults, and the whole world might suddenly seem to 
change so that everything now seems glorious. You'd be left with 
few worries, concerns, or goals—and others might describe you as 
elated, euphoric, demented, or manic. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

However, if you turned too many Crirics on, you'd see imperfections 
everywhere. Your entire world would seem filled with 
flaws, engulfed in a flood of ugliness. If you also found fault with 
your goals themselves, you'd feci no urge to straighten things out, 
or to respond to any encouragement. 

This means that those Critics must be controlled: if you were to turn too 
many on, then you would never get anything done. But if you turned ali 
your Critics off, it might seem as though ali your goals were achieved— 
and again you wouldn't accomplish much. 

So lets look more closely at what could happen if something turned 
most of your Critics off. If you'd like to experience this yourself, there 
are some well-known steps you can take.1 It would help to be suffering 
pain and stress, so starvation and cold may also assist—so will psychoactive 
drugs. Meditation can have such effects, and it helps to move into 
some strange, quiet place. Next, you could set up a rhythmical drone that 
repeats some monotonous phrase or tone, and soon it will lose all meaning 
and sense—and so will virtually everything else! Then, if you can get yourself 
into such a condition, you'll have a chance to undergo this singular 
kind of experience: 

Meditator: It suddenly seemed as if I was surrounded by an 
immensely powerful Presence. I felt that a Truth had been 
"revealed" to me that was far more important than anything else, 
and for which [ needed no further evidence. But when later I tried 
to describe this to my friends, I found that 1 had nothing to say 
except how wonderful that experience was. 

This peculiar type of mental state is sometimes called a "Mystical Experience" 
or "Rapture," "Ecstasy," or "Bliss." Some who undergo it call it 
"wonderful," but a better word might be "wonderless," because I suspect 
that such a state of mind may result from turning so many Critics off that 
one cannot find any flaws in it. 

What might that "powerful Presence" represent? It is sometimes seen 
as a deity, but I suspect that it is likely to be a version of some early 
Imprimer that for years has been hiding inside your mind. In any case, 
such experiences can be dangerous—for some vicrims find them so compelling 
that they devote the rest of their lives to trying to get themselves 
back to that state again. 


1'ROM I'AINTOSLTTERIM; m 

Nevertheless, in everyday life there remains a wide range in which it's 
both useful and safe to regulate your collection of Critics. Sometimes you 
feel adventurous, inclined to try new experiments. Other times you feel 
conservative, and try to avoid uncertainty. And when you're in an emergency 
and don't have time to reason things out, you may need to ser aside 
your long-range plans and expose yourself to pain and stress. To do this, 
you'll have to suppress at least some of your Correctors and Censors. 

All this raises many questions about how we develop our mental Critics. 
How do we make them and how do we change them? Do some of 
diem scold other Critics when they produce poor performances? Are certain 
minds more productive because their Critics are better organized? 
We'll come back to such questions in Chapter 7-6. 

3-JJ Emotional Exploitation 

Whatever you may be trying to do, your brain may have other plans for 
you. 

I was trying to work on a difficult problem, but was beginning to 
fall asleep. Then I found myself imagining that my friend Professor 
Challenger was about to develop the same technique. This caused 
a flicker of angry frustration, which blocked for the moment my 
urge to sleep—and this allowed me to finish my job."1 

In fact. Challenger was not doing any such thing; he works in a totally different 
field—but we had recently been in an argument, so he could serve 
as a person to be angry at. Let's make up a theory of how this worked. 

A resource called Work was attending to one of my goals, but the 
process called Sleep tried to take over control. Then, somehow, I 
constructed that fantasy—and the resulting annoyance and jealousy 
counteracted that urge to sleep. 

All of us use this kind of trick to combat frustration, boredom, hunger, 
or sleep. By self-inducing anger or shame, you can sometimes counteract 
fatigue or pain—as when one is falling behind in a race, or trying to lift 
too heavy a weight. With such emotional "double negatives," you can 
use one system to switch off another. However, such "self-control" tactics 
must be used cautiously. If you don't make yourself angry enough, you 


THE EMtmON MACHINE 

might relapse into lassitude—whereas if you make yourself become too 
irate, you might completely forget what you had wanted to do. Sometimes, 
just a tweak of anger might ward off sleep, in a moment so brief 
that you don't notice it. 

Here's anothet example where part of a mind "exploits" one emotion 
for the purpose of turning off another—thus helping you to attain some 
goal that you cannot achieve more directly, 

Joan is trying to follow a diet. When she sees that chocolate cake, 
she is filled with a strong temptation to eat. But when she imagines 
a certain friend looking gorgeous in her bathing suit, then 
Joan's craving to have a similar shape keeps her from actually eating 
the cake. 

How might such a fantasy work to produce that kind of effect? Joan has 
no straightforward way to suppress her reckless appetite—but she knows 
that the sight of her rival makes her more concerned about her body's 
shape. Therefore, arousing that image is likely to diminish her urge to eat. 
(Of course, that strategy carries some risk: if her jealousy makes Joan feel 
depressed, she mighr engorge the entire cake.) 

Citizen: Why should we need to use fantasies to induce ourselves 
to do such things when we know that those images aren't 
real? Why can't we use more rational ways to figure out what we 
should do? 

One answer is that the concept of "rational" itself is a kind of fantasy— 
because our thinking is never entirely based on purely logical reasoning. 
To us, it might seem "irrational" to exploit an emotion to solve a problem. 
However, when Joan's Losing Weight encounters an obstacle, it makes just 
as much sense for that goal to exploit emotions Wke Jealousy or Disgust as it 
would for Joan herself to use a stick to extend her reach-—no matter that 
even Joan herself may see such behaviots as "emotional," 

Besides, we're always exploiting fantasies in the course of our everyday 
commonscnse thinking. When you sit at a table across from friends, you 
cannot see their backs or legs, but this is of no concern to you because 
most of what you think you see comes from your internal models and 
memories. For while some parts of your brain get information from the 


I ROM PAIN TO SUFFERING 

outer world, most of them arc reacting to information they get from other 
processes inside your brain. Indeed, a major part of our daily lives consists 
of imagining things we don't have but might need—such as a forthcoming 
vacation. More generally to think about changing the way things are, we have 
to imagine how they might be. 

Citizen: I agree that we frequendy do such things—but why should 
we need to tell lies to ourselves? "Why can't we directly just turn 
off Sleep, instead of resorting to fantasies? Why cant we simply 
command our minds to do whatever we want them to do? 

One answer seems clear: directness would be too dangerous. If some other 
goal could simply turn Hunger off, we'd all be in peril of starving to death. 
If it could directly switch Anger on, we might find ourselves fighting most 
of the time. If it could simply extinguish Sleep, we'd be likely to wear 
our bodies out. So this shaped the way our brains evolved the instinctive 
reactions that keep us alive—by making it hard to hold one's breath, or to 
keep from falling asleep, or to control how much you eat; those who were 
able to do such dangerous things left fewer descendants rhan did rhe rest. 


4 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


4-1 What in the World Is Consciousness? 

"No philosopher and hardly any novelist has ever managed to 
explain what that weird stuff, human consciousness, is really 
made of. Body, external objects, darty memories, warm fantasies, 
other minds, guilt, fear, hesitation, lies, glees, doles, breath-taking 
pains, a thousand things which words can only fumble at, coexist, 
many fused together m a single unit of consciousness," 

—Iris Murdoch, in The Black Prince 

What kinds of creatures have consciousness? Does it exist in chimpanzees—
or in gorillas, baboons, or orangutans? What about dolphins 
or elephants? Are crocodiles, frogs, or fish aware of themselves to any 
extent—or is consciousness a singular trait that distinguishes us from the 
rest of the beasts? 

Of course, those animals won't answer questions like, "What is your 
view of the nature of mind." But when we interview mystical thinkers 
who claim to know what consciousness is, their replies are seldom more 
enlightening. 

Sri Chinmoy 2003: "Consciousness is the inner spark or inner 
link in us, the golden link within us that connects our highest 
and most illumined part with our lowest and most unillumined 
part. 


CONSCIOUSNESS

Some philosophers even insist that no one has better ideas about this. 

Jerry Fodor 1992: "Nobody has the slightest idea how anything 
material could be conscious. Nobody even knows what it would be 
like to have the slightest idea about how anything material could be 
conscious. So much for the philosophy of consciousness." 

Is consciousness an all-or-none trait that has a clear and definite boundary? 

Absolutist: We don't know where consciousness starts and stops, 
but every object must be conscious or not—and, clearly, people 
are conscious, while rocks are not. 

Or does consciousness come in different degrees? 

Relativist: Everything has some consciousness. An atom has only 
a little of it, while brains can have it to greater degrees—and perhaps 
there are no limits to it. 

Or is that question still too vague to justify trying to answer it? 

Logicist: Before you go on about consciousness, you really ought 
to define it. Good arguments should start right out by stating precisely 
whar rhey are about. Otherwise, you'll begin with a shaky 
foundation. 

The Logicist s policy might seem "logical"—but, although we don't like to 
be imprecise, a clear definition can make things worse, until we're sure that 
our ideas are right. For, consciousness is one of those suitcase-like words that 
we use for many types of processes, and for different kinds of purposes. 
It's the same for most of our other words about minds, such as awareness, 
sentience, or intelligence.' 

So instead of asking what consciousness is, we'll try to examine when, 
how, and why people use those mysterious words. But why do such questions 
even arise? What, for that mattet, are mysteries? 

Danie! Dennett 1991: "A mystery is a phenomenon that people 
don't know how to think about—yet. Human consciousness is just 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

about the last surviving mystery. There have been other great mysteries 
[like those] of the origin of the universe and of time, space, 
and gravity. . . . However, consciousness stands alone today as a 
topic that often leaves even the most sophisticated thinkers tongue-
tied and confused. And, as with all of the earlier mysteries, there are 
many who insist—and hope—that there will never be a demystification 
of consciousness." 

Indeed, many of those who "insist—and hope" that consciousness cannot 
be explained still maintain that it alone is the source of most of the virtues 
of human minds. 

Thinker 1: Consciousness is what binds all our mental events 
together, and thus unifies our present, past, and future into our 
continuous sense of experience. 

Thinker 2: Consciousness makes us "aware" of ourselves, and 
gives us our sense of identity; it is what animates our minds and 
gives us our sense of being alive. 

Thinker 3: Consciousness is what gives things meaning to us; 

without it, we would not even know we had feelings. 

Wow! Wouldn't it be astonishing if any one principle, power, or force 

could endow us with all those abilities? 
However, I'll argue that it would be a mistake to believe in any such 
entity—because we ought to be asking this question, instead: "Isn't it 
remarkable that any single word or phrase could have come to mean so many 
different things?" 

William Calvin and George Ojeman 1994: "Modern discussions 
of consciousness . . . usually include such aspects of mental life as 
focusing your attention, things that you didn't know you knew, 
mental rehearsal, imagery, thinking, decision making, awareness, 
altered states of consciousness, voluntary actions, subliminal 
priming, the development of the concept of self in children, and 
the narratives we tell ourselves when awake or dreaming." 


CONSCIOUSNESS ')? 

AJI this should lead us to conclude that consciousness is a suitcase-like word 
that we use ro refer to many different mental activities, which don't have 
a single cause or origin—and, surely, this is why people have found it so 
hard to "understand what consciousness is." The trouble was that they 
tried to pack into a singie box all the products of many processes that go 
on in different parrs of our brains—and this produced a problem that will 
remain unsolvable until we find ways ro chop it up. However, once we 
imagine a mind as made of smaller parts, we can replace that single, big 
problem by many smaller, more solvable ones—which is just what this 
chapter will try to do. 

4-2 Unpacking the Suitcase of Consciousness 

Aaron Sloman 1994: "It is not worth asking how to define consciousness, 
how to explain it, how it evolved, what its function is, 
etc., because there's no one thing for which all the answers would 
be the same. Instead, we have many sub-capabilities, for which the 
answers are different: e.g., different kinds of perception, learning, 
knowledge, attention control, self-monitoring, self-control, etc." 

To see the variety of what human minds do, consider this fragment of 
everyday thinking. 

Joan is starting to cross the street on the way to deliver her finished 
report. While thinking about what to say at the meeting, she hears a 
sound and turns her head-—and sees a quickly oncoming car. Uncertain 
as to whether to cross or retreat, but uneasy about arriving late, 
Joan decides to sprint across the road. She later remembers her injured 
knee and reflects upon her impulsive decision. "If my knee had failed, 
I could have been killed. Then what would my friends have thought 
of me?" 

It might seem natural to ask, "How conscious was Joan of what she did?" Rut 
rather than dwell on that consciousness word, let's look at some things that 
Joan actually did. 

Reaction: Joan reacted quickly to that sound. 
Identification: She recognized it as being a sound. 



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Specification: She classified it as the sound of a car. 
Attention: She noticed certain things rather than others. 
Indecision: She wondered whether to cross or retreat. 
Imagining: She envisioned two possible future conditions. 
Selection: She selected a way to choose among options. 
Decision: She chose one of several alternative actions. 
Planning: She constructed a multistep action plan. 
Reconsideration: Later she reconsidered this choice. 


She also did other things like these. 

Learning: She created descriptions and stored them away. 
Recollecting: She retrieved descriptions of prior events. 
Embodiment: She tried to describe her body's condition. 
Expression: She constructed some verbal representations. 
Narration: She arranged these into storylike structures. 
Intention: She changed some goals and priorities. 
Apprehension: She was uneasy about arriving late. 
Reasoning: She made various kinds of inferences. 


She also used many processes that involved reflecting on what some of 
those other processes did. 

Reflection: She thought about what she had recently done. 
Self-Reflection: She reflected on what she had thought about. 
Empathy: She imagined some other persons' thoughts. 
Reformulation: She revised some of her representations. 
Moral Reflection: She evaluated what she has done. 
Self-Awareness: She characterized her mental condition. 
Self-Imaging: She made and used models of herself. 
Sense of Identity: She regarded herself as an entity. 


This is only the start of a catalog of some of Joans mental activities—and 
if we want to understand how her thinking works, we'll need to have much 
better ideas about how each of those activities work and how they all are 
organized. At various points in the rest of this book, we'll examine each 
item on that list and try to break it into parts—to see what processes it 
might involve. However, to accomplish this, we'll need to begin with some 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

way or ways to divide an entire mind into parts—and our everyday folk-
psychology abounds with ideas about dividing the functions of minds into 
pairs like these: 

Conscious vs. Unconscious 
Premeditated vs. Impulsive 
Delihetate vs. Spontaneous 
Intentional vs. Involuntary 
Cognitive vs. Subcogniuve2 


We'll discuss such "dumbbell" distinctions in Chapter 9-2, and will 
conclude that each such division is simply too crude. For example, the 
division between conscious and unconscious does not distinguish between 
infotmation that is inaccessible because one has no way to access it, 
or because it is actively censored or "repressed," or because (as Freud 
suggesred) it has been "sublimated" into some form that one cannot recognize—
or because one has simply failed to rettieve it (that is, to bring 
it into one's active wotking memory). In any case, this book will argue 
that little good will come from attempts to divide our minds into only 
two parts. 

We have already seen some useful ways to split a mind into large numbers 
of different parts—for example, as sets of resources or as collections of 
rules. However, for making better genetalizations, we'll need a design that 
has fewet components. Accotdingly, every chapter of this book will exploit 
the idea that a mind is composed of processes that operate on just a few 
"levels." Beginning with three such levels will help us to avoid "dumbbell" 
distinctions, and the following chapter will argue that we'll need at least 
three more higher levels of mind. Nevertheless, the rest of this chapter will 
mainly focus on the question of why people are so prone to pack so many 
different concepts into that single "suitcase of consciousness." 

4-3 ^4-Brains and /J-Brains 

Socrates: Imagine men living in an underground den, which has an 
opening towards the light—but the men have been chained from 
their childhood so that they never can turn their heads around 
and can only look toward the back of the cave. Far behind them, 
outside the cave, a fire is blazing, and between the fire and the 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

prisoners there is a low wall built along the way, like the screen 
that puppeteers have in front of them, over which they show the 
puppets. 

Glaucon: I see. 

Socrates: And do you see men passing along the wall carrying 
all sorts of vessels, and statues and figures of animals made of 
wood, stone, and various materials, which appear over the wall? 
Some of them are talking, others silent. 

Gtaucon: You have shown me a strange image. . . . 

Socrates: Like us, they see nothing but only the shadows of 
themselves and of those other objects, which the fire throws on 
the opposite wall of the cave.... Then in every way such prisoners 
would deem reality to be nothing else than those shadows. . . . 

—Plato, in The Republic 

Can you think about what you are thinking right now'i In a literal sense, 
that's impossible—because each new such thought would alter the thoughts 
that you were just thinking before. However, you can settle for something 
slightly less, by imagining that your brain (or mind) is composed of two 
principal parts: Let's call these your "A-Brain"and "B-Bmin." 


Now suppose that your ,^-Brain gets some signals from the external 
world (via such organs as eyes, ears, nose, and skin)—and that it also can 
react to these by sending signals that make your muscles move. By itself, 
the ^4-Brain is a separate animal that only reacts to external events but has 
no sense of what they might mean. For example, when the fingertips of 
two lovers come into intimate physical contact, the resulting sensations, 
by themselves, have no particular implications. For there is no significance 


CONSCIOUSNESS H)| 

in those signals themselves: their meanings to those lovers lie in how they 
represent and process them in the higher levels of their minds. (See Pohl 
1970.) 

Similarly, your B-Brain is connected so that ir can react to signals that 
it receives from A, and then can react by sending signals to A. However, 
B has no direct connection to the outer world, so, like the prisoners in 
Plato's cave, who sec only shadows on a wall, the fi-Brain mistakes As 
descriptions for real things. The i?-Brain does not realize that what it perceives 
are not objects in the external world but are merely events in the 
y4-Brain itself 

Neurologist: That also applies to you and me. For whatever you 
think you touch or see, the higher levels of your brain never can 
actually contact these—but can only interpret the representations 
of them that your mental resources construct tot you. 

Nevertheless, although the B-Brain cannot directly perform any physical 
actions, it still can affect the external world, by controlling the ways in 
which A might react. For example, if B sees that A. has got stuck at repeating 
itself, it might suffice lor B to instruct A to change its strategy. 

Student; Sometimes, when I've misplaced my eyeglasses, I keep 
looking for them in the very same place. Then a silent voice 
reproaches me, suggesting that I stop repeating myself. But what 
if I were crossing a street when suddenly my B-Brain said "Sir, 
you've repeated the same actions with your leg for more rhan a 
dozen consecutive times. You should stop right now and do something 
else," That could cause me a serious accident. 

To prevent such mistakes, a 5-Brain would need appropriate ways to 
represent things. In this case, you would be better off if your if-Brain 
represented "walking to a certain place"'as a single extended act, like, "Keep 
moving your legs till you get to the other side of the street." 

However, this raises the question of how that S-Brain could acquire 
such skills.•' Some could be built into it from the start, but, for the B-Brain 
to learn new techniques, it might itself need similar help, which could 
come from a level above it. Then while the /-."-Brain deals with its A-Brain 
world, that "C-Brain" in turn will supervise B. 


THK EMOTION MACHINE, 


Student: Would not this raise increasingly difficult questions, 
because each higher level would need to be smarter and wiser? 

Not necessarily, because that C-Brain could act like a "manager" who has 
no special expertise about how to do any particular job—but still could 
give "general" guidance like this: 

If 5's descriptions seem too vague, C tells it to use more specific 
details. 
If ,.3's are buried in too much detail, Csuggesrs more abstract 
descriptions. 
If what B is doing is taking too long, C tells it to try some other 
technique. 

Furthermore, if both B-Brain and C-Brain get stuck, we could add yet 
more levels to out multilayer mind-machine. 

Student; How many such levels does a person need? Do we have 
dozens or hundreds of them? 

Levels, Layers, anil Organisms 

This book suggests many reasons to think that our human mental 
resources are organized into at least these six levels of processes, as illustrated 
in the next figure: 


CONSCIOllSNESS 


We can see each of these as aspects of Joan's decision to hurry across 
that street: 

What caused Joan to turn toward that sound? [Instinctive] 
How did she know that it was the sound of a car? [Learned] 
What resources were used to make her decision? [Deliberative] 
How did she choose which resources to use? [Reflective] 
Did she feel that she made a good decision? [Self-Reflc-ctive] 
Did her actions live up to her principles? [Self-Conscious] 


We know that by the time of birth, every infant is already equipped with 
a variety of instinctive reactions, and has started to add learned reactions 
to these. Then, over time, we progressively add more deliberative ways 
to reason, imagine, and plan for the future. Later, we build a new layer 
in which we start to do reflective thinking about our own thoughts—and 
two-year-old children already arc making additional ways to self-reflect 
about why and how they thought those things. And, eventually, we begin 
to think more self-consciously about which things to regard as right or 
wrong to do. Chapter 5 will add more details about how such systems 
might be organized. 

Student: Does your theory really need so many different levels? 
Arc you sure that you can't make do with fewer of them? Indeed, 
why should we need any "levels" at alt—instead of a single big, 
cross-con nee ted network of resources? 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

The Evolution of Psychology 

There is an evolutionary reason for why we should not expect the brain 
to be a single, highly interconnected network: it would be almost impossible 
for such a system to evolve—because it would have so many flaws or 
"bugs" that it could not survive for long. And, of course, no system could 
do very much if its parts were not interconnected enough. This means that 

whenever we increase a system's size, its performance is likely to decline—unless 
we also improve its design. Let's give this argument a name: 

The Organism Principle: When a system evolves to become more 
complex, this always involves a compromise: if its parts become 
too separate, then the system's abilities will be limited—but if 
there are too many interconnections, then each change in one 
part will disrupt many others. 

This surely is the reason why the bodies of all living things are composed 
of the distinctively separate parts we call "organs." In fact, that's why we 
call them "organisms": 

Organism: A body made up of organs, organelles, or other parts 
that work together ro carry on the various processes of life. 

This also applies to the organs called brains: 

Embryologist: In its early development, a typical structure in the 
brain starts out with more or less definite layers or levels like those 
in your A, B, C diagrams. But later those layers become less well 
defined because various groups of cells grow connections to other, 
more distant locations. 

During rhe eons through which our brains evolved, our ancestors had 
to adapt to thousands of different environments—and, during each such 
episode, some structures that worked well in earlier times now behaved in 
some dangerous ways, so we had to evolve corrections for them. However, 
the evolution of a species is also constrained by the fact that it is extremely 
dangerous to make any change in the earlier stages of an animal's development—
because most of the structures that later evolved depend very much on 
how those earlier structures work. 


CONSCIOUSNESS

Consequently, evolution often works by adding new fixes and patches 
that modify structures that have been already established. For example, after 
certain major stages of growrh in the brain, many new cells are later 
destroyed by "post-editing" processes that evolved to delete some types of 
connections. 

The same sort of constraint also seems to apply whenever we try to 
improve the performance of any large system. For example, aftet every 
change we make in an existing computer program, we usually find that 
this has created additional bugs—and then we need to make yet more corrections. 
In fact, many computer systems eventually become so ponderous 
that their further development stops, because their programmers can no 
longer keep track of what all the previous programmers did. 

Similarly, it appears that our brains result from processes in which 
each new part in based on some older designs, but also includes exceptions 
to it. Indeed, I suspect that large parts of our brains work mainly to 
correct mistakes that other parts make—and this is surely one reason why 
the subject of human psychology has become so hard. We can expect to 
discover neat rules and laws that partly explain many aspects of how we 
think. However, every such "law of thought" will also need a sizable list of 
exceptions to it. So psychology will never be much like physics, in which 
we frequently find ''unified theories" that work flawlessly. 

Why Can't We See How Our Own Minds Work? 

Why cannot we simply look into our minds to see precisely how they 
work? Why can't minds completely inspect themselves? Whatever those 
limitations may be, the philosopher Hume concluded that we could never 
surmount all of them: 

David Hume 1748: "The motion of our body follows upon the 
command of our will. Of this we are every moment conscious. 
But the means, by which this is effected; the energy, by which the 
will performs so extraordinary an operation; of this we are so far 
from being immediately conscious, that it must for ever escape 
our most diligent enquiry." 

1 suspect that Hume was right to think that no mind could wholly understand 
itself by trying to look inside itself. One problem is that each part of 
the brain does much of its work in ways that other parts cannot observe. 


THKKMOTIONMACHINK 

Another obstacle is that when any part tries to examine another, that probing 
may alter the state of that other part, thus corrupting the very evidence 
that the first part was trying to get. 

However, way back in 1748, not even David Hume could predict 
that we would develop instruments that could look inside a living brain 
without destroying any evidence. Yet today, every year brings new scanning 
machines that reveal even more derails of the processes that we call 
"mental events." Nevertheless, some thinkers still claim that this will never 
tell us enough: 

Dualist philosopher: All such methods are doomed to fail because, 
although you can measure or weigh the parts of a brain, no physical 
instrument can ever detect subjective experiences like thoughts 
or ideas, which exist in a separate mental world. 

Such thinkers believe that our feelings are caused by nonphysical processes 
that will forever remain beyond the realm of scientific explanations. However, 
I'll argue that this opinion results from squeezing too many different 
questions into a single word like "subjective," That gives us the illusion 
we're facing one single, unsolvable mystery—but Chapter 9 will try to 
show that, although some of those questions are difficult, we can make 
progress on all of them by dealing with each of diem separately. 

Holist: I don't believe that approach will work because consciousness 
is just one of those "wholes" that emerges inexplicably 
whenever a system gets complex enough. And that is just what we 
should expect from the network of billions of cells in a brain. 

If mere complexity were enough, then almost everything would have consciousness! 
For example, the manner in which a wave breaks on a beach is 
more complex in most respects than the processes that go on in a brain— 
but this should not lead us to conclude that waves think. For as our 
Organism Principle says, if a system's parts have too many connections, 
nothing but traffic jams will "emerge"—while if its interconnections are 
too sparse, then the system will do almost nothing at all. 

All these arguments suggest that there is little to gain from wondering 
what consciousness "is"—because that word includes too much for us to 
deal with all at once. Let's listen to Aaron Sloman again: 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

Aaron Sloman 1992: "I, for one, do not think defining consciousness 
is important at all, and I believe that it diverts attention from 
important and difficult problems. The whole idea is based on 
a fundamental misconception that just because there is a noun 
'consciousness' there is some 'thing' like magnetism or electricity 
or pressure or temperature, and that it's worth looking for correlates 
of that thing. Or on the misconception that it is worth trying 
to prove that certain mechanisms can or cannot produce 'it,' or 
trying to find out how 'it' evolved, or trying to find out which 
animals have 'it,' or trying to decide at which moment 'it' starts 
when a fetus develops, or at which moment 'it' stops when brain 
death occurs, etc. There will not be one thing to be correlated but 
a very large collection of very different things," 

I completely agree with Sloman's view. To understand how our thinking 
works, we must study each of those "very different things" and then ask 
what kinds of machinery could accomplish some or all of them. In other 
words, we must try to design—as opposed to define—machines that can do 
what human minds do. 

4-4 Overrating Consciousness 

Wilhelm Wundt 1897: "Our mind is so fortunately equipped that 
if brings us the most imporrant bases for our thoughts without 
our having the least knowledge of this wotk of elaboration. Only 
the results of it become conscious. This unconscious mind is for 
us like an unknown being who creates and produces for us, and 
finally throws the ripe fruits in our lap," 

One reason why consciousness seems so mysterious is that we exaggerate 
our perceptiveness. For example, as soon as you enter a room, you have 
the sense that you instantly see everything that is in your view. However, 
this is far from true: it is an illusion that comes because your eyes so 
quickly turn to focus upon whatever has attracted your attention, (See 
Immanence Illusion in Section 4-5.) Similarly, rhis also applies to consciousness, 
because we make the same sorts of mistakes about how much 
we can "see" inside our own minds. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Patrick Hayes 1997: "Imagine what it would be like to be conscious 
of the processes by which we generate imagined (or real) 
speech. . . . [Then] a simple act like 'thinking of a name,' say, 
would become a complex and skilled deployment of elaborate 
machinery of lexical access, like playing an interna] filing-organ. 
The words and phrases that just come to us to serve our communicative 
purposes would be disrant goals, requiring knowledge 
and skill to achieve, like an orchestra playing a symphony or a 
mechanic attending to an elaborate mechanism..,. [So if we were 
aware of all thts, then] we would all be cast in the roles of something 
like servants of our former selves, running around inside 
our own heads attending to the details of the mental machinery 
which currently is so conveniently hidden from our view, leaving 
us time to attend to more important matters. Why be in the 
engine room if we can be on the bridge?" 

In this paradoxical view, consciousness still seems marvelous—not because 
it tells us so much, but because it protects us from so much tedious stuff!4 
Here is another description of this: 

"Consider how a driver guides the immense momentum of a car, 
not knowing how its engine works or how its steering wheel turns 
it left or right. Yet when one comes to think of it, we drive our 
bodies, cars, and minds in very similar ways. So far as conscious 
thought is concerned, you steer yourself in much the same way; 
you merely choose your new direction, and all the rest takes care 
of itself. This incredible process involves a huge society of muscles, 
bones, and joints, all controlled by hundreds of interacting 
programs that even specialists don't yet understand. Yet all you 
think is 'Turn that way,' and your wish is automatically fulfilled. 
. . . And when you come to think about this, it scarcely could 
be otherwise! What would happen if we were forced to perceive 
the trillions of circuits in our brains? Scientists have peered at 
these for a hundred years—yet still know little of how they work. 
Fortunately, in everyday life, we only need to know what they 
achieve! Consider that you can scarcely see a hammer except as 
something to hit things with, or see a ball except as a thing to 
throw and catch. Why do we see things less as they are, and more 
with a view of how they are used?"5 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

Similarly, whenever you play a computer game, you control what happens 
inside the computer mainly by using symbols and names. The processes 
we call "consciousness" do very much the same. It's as though the higher 
levels of our minds sit at mental terminals, steering great engines in our 
brains, not by knowing how that machinery works but by "clicking" on 
symbols from menu lists that appear on our mental screen displays. And, 
after ail, we ought not to be surprised by this; our minds did not evolve to 
serve as instruments lor observing themselves, but for solving such practical 
problems as nutrition, defense, and reproduction. 

Suitcase Words in Psychology 

"A definition is the enclosing a wilderness of ideas within a wall of 
words," 

—Samuel Butler 

Many words are hard to define because the things that they try to describe 
do not have definite boundary lines. 

When is a person large or small? 

When is an object hard or soft? 

When does a mist change into a fog? 

Where is the Indian Ocean's edge? 

It doesn't make sense to argue about exactly where such boundaries are 
because they depend on the contexts in which those words are used—-as 
in, "A very large mouse is smaller than even a very small elephant." 

However, we have far more serious problems with most psychologywords—
the terms we use to describe our states of mind—such as Attention, 
Emotion, Perception, Consciousness, Thinking, Feeling, Selfoi Intelligence-— 
or Pleasure, Pain, or Happiness. Each such word refers, at different times, 
to different kinds of processes—and then it is not just a matter of drawing 
a line, but of switching between different meanings. Yet we seem ro do all 
this so fluently that we are rarely aware that we're doing it. For example, 
we don't find it difficult to understand a statement like this: 

Despite his conscious efforts to please her, Charles became con


scious that Joan was annoyed. Hewas conscious of his own distress 

but was not conscious that he was unconsciously revealing this. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Here, each occurrence of "conscious" could be better expressed by a different 
word, such as deliberate, aware, reflected, realized, or unwittingly-—each 
of which has its own cluster of meanings. This raises the question of why 
the language we use for discussing our minds came to include so many 
suitcase-1 ike words? 

Psychologist: Suitcase words are useful in everyday life when they 
help us to communicate. But we won't know what each other 
means unless we share the same jumbles of ideas. 

Psychiatrist: We often use those suitcase words to keep from asking 
questions about ourselves. Just having a name for an answer 
can make us feel as though we actually have the answer itself. 

Ethicist: We need the idea of consciousness to support our beliefs 
about responsibility and discipline. Our legal and ethical principles 
are largely based on the idea that we should only censure 
"intentional" acts, that is, ones that have been planned in advance, 
with awareness about their consequences. 

Holist: Although many processes may be involved, we'll still need 
to explain how they combine to produce our stream of conscious 
thoughts—and our explanations will need some words to describe 
the phenomena that emerge from this. 

Of course, we see the same phenomena, not only in regard to psychology-
words, but even when we talk about physical objects. Consider the 
clusters of meanings in this typical dictionary entry for "furniture." 

Furniture, n. the movable articles in a room or an establishment 
that make it suitable for living or working 

That word suitable assumes that the reader has a massive network of 
commonsense knowledge. For example, to make a bedroom suitable, its 
furniture must include a bed, where an office would need a desk instead, 
and a dining room would need a table and chairs—because suitable 
assumes that you know what materials are appropriate for whatever goals 
you pursue. 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

Suitable, adj. ol the right type or quality for a particular purpose 
or occasion 

Why do we pack so many different meanings into each of our suitcase-
words? Well, we can see a clue by looking inside someone's travel bag: 
you don't need to assume that those objects themselves have any common 
features—except that each of them serves some of the goals of the person 
who packed them into that bag! 

I am not suggesting that we should try to dissect and replace all our 
suitcase-words, because they incorporate ambiguities that have evolved 
over centuries, to serve many important purposes—bur also, they often 
handicap us by preserving outdated concepts. For example, tt is hard to 
imagine a more useful distinction than between being alive and being 
dead—because in the past, all the things that we called "alive" had many 
features in common, such as the need for nutrition, defense, and procreation. 
However, this led many thinkers to assume that all those 
seemingly common traits are somehow derived from some single, central, 
"vital force"—rather than from massive collections of different 
processes that go on inside membranes rilled with intricate machinery; 
today it makes less sense to use "alive" as though there were a definite 
boundary line that separates animals from machines. This chapter will 
argue that we all still make just that type of mistake when we use words 
like consciousness. 

Aaron Sloman 1992: "The phrase 'human consciousness' typically 
corresponds to such a large cluster of features and capabilities 
(many of which we don't yet understand or know about) that its set 
of possible subsets is astronomical. There's no point in expecting 
agreement on which subset is required for an animal or machine 
to be conscious, or asking when a human fetus first becomes 
conscious, or when a brain-damaged person is conscious, etc, A 
concept that is designed to work in various standard cases will just 
break down in non-standard cases, like 'the time on the moon.' 
. . . And ail those attempts to draw mythical lines will come to 
no more than a big waste of time—as opposed to researching the 
implications of all those different clusters of functions and coming 
up with a new and richer vocabulary." 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

However, there still are many scientists who seek to discover the "secret" 
of consciousness. They look for it in the waves of our brains, or in peculiar 
behaviors of certain cells, or in the mathematics of quantum mechanics. 
Why would those theorists hope to find one single concept, process, or 
thing to explain all those different aspects of minds? Perhaps that's because 
they would prefer to have only one very large problem to solve—as opposed 
to dozens or hundreds of smaller ones. 

Aaron Sloman 1994: "People are too impatient. They want a 
three-line definition of consciousness and a five-line proof that 
a computational system can or cannot have consciousness. And 
they want it today. They don't want to do the hard work of unraveling 
complex and muddled concepts that we already have, and 
exploring new variants that could emerge from precisely specified 
architectures for behaving systems." 

4-5 How Do We Initiate Consciousness? 

We like to classify our activities into ones that we do intentionally, as 
opposed to actions we do unconsciously—that is, with almost no sense that 
we're doing them. We regard this distinction to be so important as to place 
it at the foundation of our social, legal, and ethical systems and assign 
less censure or blame to the injurious things that people do "unintentionally." 
For example, many legal systems respect defenses like, "I did not 
consciously plan to commit that crime. " Thus, the word conscious provides 
us with socially useful ways to talk about how our minds behave. 

In any case, most of our mental processes work in ways that don't cause 
us to think or reflect about why and how we are doing them. However, 
when those processes don't function well or when they encounter obstacles, this 
starts up high-level activities that often include these kinds of properties: 

(1) They use the models we make of ourselves. 
(2) They tend to be more serial and less parallel. 
(3) They tend to use symbolic descriptions. 
(4) They make use of our most recent memories. 
What might cause a person to start using those kinds of processes? It 
seems to me that an appropriate occasion for this would be whenever you 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

recognize that you have encountered some serious obstacle—-for example, 
not achieving some urgent goal. In such a condition, you might complain 
about feeling frustrated or distressed, and then attempt to remedy this by 
mental acts, which, if expressed in words, might say, "Now I should make 
myself concentrate, "or "I should try to think in some more organized way, "or 
"I should switch to a higher-level overview." 

What kind of machinery could cause you to think in such ways? Let's 
assume that your brain contains one or more special "trouble-detectors" 
that start to react when your usual systems don't achieve some goal. Then 
such a resource could go on to activate other, higher-level processes, such 
as the ones in this diagram: 


A "TROUBLE-DETECTING CRITIC" 

The idea is that this can help you to diink about your situation more 
deliberately and reflectively or, as we say, "more consciously," by "elevating" 
(see Chapter 2-4) the levels of your mental activities. 

Student: How did you choose these particular features to characterize 
what one might call a conscious state of mind? Since 
consciousness is a suitcase-word, each person might make a different 
list. 

Agreed, and each reader might make a different list of the processes that 
they might associate with the wotd consciousness. Indeed, as with most 
other psychology-words, we're likely to switch among different such lists, 
because it seems unlikely that we could ever capture all of the meanings 
of any such word by defining a single Critic like this. However, here are 


THE EMOTJOr\ MACHINE 

some reasons why any highly reflective system might need at least those 
lour constituents. 

Self-Models: When Joan was thinking (in Section 4-2) about her recent 
decisions, she asked herself, "What would my friends have thought of me?" 
But to answer such questions, Joan would need to use some descriptions 
or models that represent herself and those friends. Chapter 9 will speculate 
more about how Joan could make and use such self-models; these would 
include descriptions of her physical body, representations of her various 
goals, and depictions of her dispositions in various social and physical 
contexts. 

We all construct mental models that describe our various menral states, 
bodies ol knowledge about our abilities, depictions of our acquaintances, 
and collections of stories about our pasts. Then, whenever we use our 
models of ourselves, we tend to use terms like conscious •when those reflections 
lead to choices we make, and we use unconscious or unintentional to 
describe those activities that we regard as beyond our control. 

Serial Processes: You can walk, see, and talk at the very same time— 
but find it much harder to use both hands at once to draw two different 
things. Why can you do certain tasks simultaneously, but need to do others 
at different times? You may be forced to do things "one at a time" whenever 
different jobs have to compere for the use of the same resources. The 
processes involved with walking, seeing, and talking take place in different 
parts of your brain, so they don't need to compete for resources—whereas, 
for drawing a table and drawing a chair, you are likely to need to use 
the same higher-level resources to form and keep track of some intricate 
plans. 

Indeed, we all run into such conflicts whenever we try to deal with 
several hard problems at once. I suspect that this is because some of our 
uniquely human abilities evolved so very recently—that is, in only the 
past few million years—that we don't yet have multiple copies of them. 
Consequently, we are forced to work sequentially on the various parts of 
difficult jobs—instead of doing them simultaneously. 

The Parallel Paradox: Whenever one splits a problem into parts 

and tries to think about them at once, one's intellect will get dis


persed and leave less cleverness for each task. The alternative is to 


CONSCIOUSNESS

sequentially apply one's full mind to each of those parts—at the 

cost of consuming more time. 

Of course, there are other reasons why some problems have to be solved 
sequentially, as when you cannot achieve a certain goal until you've already 
accomplished some subgoal it needs.6 We have to do things sequentially, 
either when our next step depends on some previous ones or when our 
resources are otherwise limited. Either of these could be partly why we so 
often talk about our thoughts as flowing in "streams of consciousness." 

Symbolic Descriptions: Imagine that the child Carol wants to use 
some blocks to make an arch. To do this, she'll need some way to represent 
the structure that she plans to build. The diagram at left below shows 
what is called a "Connectiortist Network," which uses numbers to indicate 
how closely related are various pairs of parts. 


Numerical upright level upright 
Relation ships block block block 

If Carol used only numerical representations, her high-level systems 
would be unable to do any higher-level reasoning, because such networks 
have only those two-way links, and say nothing about the natures of those 
relationships. 

The diagram on the right shows what is called a "Semantic Network," 
which uses three-way links to indicate that different components of the 
arch have different kinds of relationships. Carol could use such knowledge 
to predict that her arch would collapse if she were to remove one of 
the upright blocks, because the top would no longer have enough support. 
Chapter 8-7 will argue that our human ability to make and use such 


THE FM0TI01N MACHINE. 

higher level "symbolic representations" (rather than simple connections or 
links) is a principal reason why people can solve more complex problems 
than animals can. 

Recent Memories: We usually think of consciousness as being about 
what's happening now—that is, in the present, rather than in the past. 
However, it would always take some amount of time for any particular 
part of a brain or machine to find out what other parts have recently 
done. For example, suppose that someone asked, "Are you aware that you re 
touching your ear?" You would not be able to reply until your language 
resources had time to react to signals from other parts of your brain that, 
in turn, have reacted to prior events. 

How Do We Recognize Consciousness? 

Up to now we've discussed what kinds of events might cause a person to 
start thinking "consciously." Now let's ask the opposite question, namely, 

"What might cause someone to talk about having been thinking consciously?" 
We can see one way to answer that, by simply reversing our "trouble-
detecting" diagram so that information flows in the other direction! 


TH E IMMANENCE ILLUSIGJV 

So here we have a brain that includes one or more "consciousnessdetecting 
Critics," each of which recognizes the activity of a certain set of 
high-level processes. Such Critics would then send signals to other parts of 
the brain—and this could enable one's language systems to describe one's 
condition with words like conscious, attentive, aware, and alert, as well as 
with words like me and myself. 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

Also, if such a detector turned out to be useful enough, one might 
come to imagine the existence of some process or entity that seems to 
be causing those activities, and this concept might get connected to such 
terms as deliberate or intentional—or even free will—so that one finds 
oneself to be saying things like, "Yes, I performed that action deliberately, so 
you have a right to praise or censure me for doing it." Furthermore, if several 
different such detectors (which recognize different such sets of conditions) 
get connected to the same language-words, then the meanings of those 
words might frequently shift—perhaps without one being "conscious" of 
this! 

Finally, one may also have some Critics that recognize that one has 
been reflecting so much that it interferes with getting anything done! A 
person might learn to react to this by stopping some high-level processes 
and proceeding with one's work less thoughtfully—or, as some say, just 
"going with the flow." 

The Immanence Illusion 

"The paradox of consciousness—that the more consciousness one 

has, the more layers of processing divide one from the world—is, 

like so much else in nature, a trade-off. Progressive distancing 

from the external world is simply the price that is paid for know


ing anything about the world at all. The deeper and broader [our] 

consciousness of the world becomes, the more complex the layers 

of processing necessary to obtain that consciousness." 

—Derek Bickerton, in Language and Species 

In Section 4-4 we mentioned that as soon as you come into a room, you 
have the sense that you instantly see everything that is in your view. However, 
this is an illusion, because it takes time to recognize the objects that 
are actually there—and you may have to revise some wrong first impressions. 
Nevertheless, we'll need to explain why our vision seems so nearly 
instantaneous. 

Similarly, inside our minds, we usually have the sense of being con


scious of what is happening now. But when we examine this critically, we 

recognize that there must be something wrong with that concept of now— 

because nothing exceeds the speed of light. This means that no particular 

part of the brain can ever know what is happening at that very same instant 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

in time—either in the outside world or in any orher part of that brain—but 
can know only a little about what happened in the recent past. 

Citizen: Then why does it seem to me that I am conscious of 
all sorts of sights and sounds, and of feeling my body moving 
around—right at this very moment of time? Why do all those 
perceptions seem to come to me instantaneously? 

It makes good sense, in everyday life, to assume that everything we see 
is "present" in the here and now, and it normally does no harm to suppose 
that we are in constant contact with the outside world. However, 
I'll argue that this illusion results from the marvelous ways in which our 
mental resources are organized. In any case, I think that this phenomenon 
deserves a name: 

The Immanence Illusion: Fot most of the questions you would 
otherwise ask, some answers will have already arrived before the 
higher levels of your mind have had enough time to ask for 
them.7 

How could our memory structures be organized to so swiftly deliver such 
information? Chapter 8 will argue that this happens when your Critics 
recognize a problem, and start retrieving the knowledge you need before 
your other processes have had time to ask questions about it. This gives 
you the sense that this information has arrived instantly—as though no 
other processes intervened. 

For example, before you enter a familiar room, it is likely that you 
have already retrieved an old description of it, and it may be quite some 
time before you notice that some things have changed. In othet words, 
much of the scene that you think you perceive is based on recollections of 
what you expected to see. 

We might suppose that it would be wonderful to be constantly aware 
of everything that is happening—but the more frequently our impressions 
change, the harder it will be for us to find significance in them. The idea 
that we exist in the present moment may be indispensable in everyday life, 
but the power of our high-level descriptions comes mainly from their stability; 
for us to sense what persists and what changes through time, we must 
be able to compare things with their descriptions from the recent past. Our 
sense of constant contact with the world is a form ol the Immanence Illu



CONSCIOUSNESS

ston: it comes when the questions that we ask get answered before we know 
that they were asked—as though their answers were already there. 

4-6 The Mystery of "Experience" 

Quite a few thinkers have argued that, even after we learn about how 
all our brain functions work, one basic question will always remain, 
namely, "Why do we have any sense of 'experiencing things?" Here is one 
philosopher who argues that explaining "subjective experience" is, by 
far, the hardest problem of psychology—and possibly one rhar will never 
be solved. 

David Chalmers 1995: "Why is it that when our cognitive systems 
engage in visual and auditory information-processing, we 
have visual or auditory experience: the quality of deep blue, the 
sensation of middle C? . . . Why should physical processing give 
rise to a rich inner life at all?.. .The emergence of experience goes 
beyond what can be derived from physical theory." 

Chalmers seems to assume that "experiencing" is quite plain and direct— 
and therefore merits a simple, compact explanation. However, once we 
recognize that terms like experience or inner life refer to big suitcases of 
different phenomena, we can start to make theories about each of those 
separate phenomena. Nevertheless, there still are many who think that we 
should seek a unified way to explain that sense of experiencing: 

Physicist: Perhaps brains exploit some unknown laws that cannot 
be built into machinery. For example, we don't really know how 
gravity works—so consciousness might be an aspect of that. 

Such speculations assume what they are trying to prove—that there must 
be a single source or cause for all the marvels of consciousness. But as we 
saw in Section 4-2, consciousness has too many different meanings to be 
a candidate for any such "unified theory." 

Student: What about the basic fact that consciousness makes me 
aware of myself? It tells me what I am thinking about, and this is 
how 1 know I exist. 


TOE EMOTION MACHINE 

When you look at a person, you cannot see into the mind behind that 
person's appearance. Similarly, when you look at yourself in a mirror, you 
cannot see what lies inside your skin—no matter that, in the popular 
view of consciousness, you also possess a magical ttick with which you 
can inspect your own mind from inside. Nevertheless, the "insights" you 
get from inside your own mind are frequently wrong—and are often less 
accutate than are the observations of your intimate friends. We frequently 
make mistakes about what we think we are thinking about. 

Citizen: That statement bothers me because I can't be mistaken 

about my thoughts, since that information comes directly to me. 

Besides, by definition, my thoughts ate exactly what 1 am thinking. 

So it may seem, but that "direct" information tells you little about why 
those words made you shake your head in that particular manner, or why 
you said "bothers" instead of "annoys." For, as every psychiatrist knows, it 
is a naive "Single-Self1 idea that one actually knows how one thinks about 
things. What's more, one may be better off that way: 

H. P Lovecraft 1926: "The most merciful thing in the world, 1 
think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. 
We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black 
seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. 
The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto 
harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated 
knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our 
frightful position therein, that wc shall either go mad from the 
revelation or flee from the deadly light into the peace and safety 
of a new dark age." 
All this should lead us to recognize that, if we take consciousness to mean 
"awareness of our internal processes"—it doesn't live up to its reputation. 

7 Self-Models and Self-Consciousness 

Wilhelm Wundt 1897: "In judging the development of self-con


sciousness, we must guard against accepting any single symptoms, 

such as the child's discrimination of the parts of his body from 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

objects of his environment, his use of the word 'I,' or even the 
recognition of his own image in the mirror. . . . The use of the 
personal pronoun is due to the child's imitation of the examples of 
those about him. This imitation comes at very different times in 
the cases of different children, even when their intellectual development 
in other respects is the same. 

In Section 4-2 we suggested that Joan "made and used models of herself"—
but we did not explain what we meant by model. We use that word 
in quite a few ways, as in "Charles is a model administrator," which means 
that Charles is an example worthy of imitating—or as in, "I'm building a 
model airplane" which means something built on a scale smaller than that 
of the original. But in this book we're using model to mean a mental representation 
that can help us to answer some questions about some other, 
more complex thing or idea. 

For example, when we say that "Joan has a mental model of Charles," 
we mean that Joan possesses some structure or knowledge that helps her 
answer some questions about Charles." I emphasize the word some because 
each of our models will give useful answers to only certain types of questions, 
but might give wrong answers to other questions. Chapter 9 will 
talk about some of Joan's models of herself that include descriptions of 
subjects like these; 

Joan's various goals and ambitions 

Her professional and political views 

Her beliefs about her abilities 

Her ideas about her social roles 

Her various moral and ethical views 

Clearly the quality of Joans thinking will depend both on how good 
her self-models are and also on how good her ways are to choose which 
model to use in each situation. For example, she could get into trouble 
if she uses a model that overrates her skills or abilities in any particular 
realm-—-or a model that makes poor judgments about whether she has 
enough self-discipline to carry out a certain plan. 

Now, to see how our models might relate to our views about consciousness, 
imagine that Joan is in a certain room and that she has a 
mental model of some of the contents in that room—and that one of 
those objects is Joan, herself. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 


Each of those objects may have submodels themselves, for describing 
their various structures and functions. In particular, Joan's model for 
the object called "Joan" will be a structure that she calls "My Self"—and 
which surely includes at least two parts: one called "My Body" and one 
called "My Mind." Furthermore, each model will have some smaller 
parts: 


If you were to ask Joan if she has a mind, she could answer "Yes,"by 
using the model that she calls "My Self." And if you asked her where her 
consciousness is, she might reply that it's part of "My Mind" (because she 
thinks of it as more like goals and ideas than like physical things such as 
hands and feet). However, if you asked Joan where her consciousness is, 
this particular model would not help her to say, as many people would, 
"My mind is inside my head (or my brain) "—unless her model called "My 
Self" iko included an "is a part-of" link from My Mind to My Head, or an 
"is caused-by" [ink from My Mind to My Brain. 

More generally, our answers to questions about ourselves will depend 
on the details of our models of ourselves. I say models instead of model 
because, as we'll see in Chapter 9, one may need different models for different 
purposes. This means that, depending on which model you use, you 
may give different answers to rhe same question—and those answers need 
not always agree. In particular, suppose that you asked Joan a question 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

like, "Were you conscious of making that choice?1'Then her answer would 
depend on whichever Self-model she next will use; for example, if Joan has 
a model of the Critic called "CD" in Section 4-5, then she might say she 
made a conscious choice—if she can recall reflecting about that decision. 
However, if Joan does not happen to use such a model, then she might call 
her decision "unconscious" or "unintentional." Or alternatively, she might 
just say that she used "free will"—which might simply mean, '7 have no 
model that explains how / made the choice I made." 

Drew McDermott 1992: "The key idea is not just that the system 
has a model of itself, but that it has a model of itself as conscious. 
A computer might have a model of its environment, in which it 
models itself as a piece of furniture. It wouldn't be conscious on 
that account." 

1-8 The Cartesian Theater 

William James 1890: "We can see that the mind is at every stage 
a theater of simultaneous possibilities. Consciousness consists in 
the comparison of these with each othet, the selection of some, 
and the suppression of orhers, ol the rest, by the reinforcing and 
inhibiting agency of attention. The highest and most celebrated 
mental products are filtered from the data chosen by the faculty 
below that... in turn sifted from a still larger amount of simpler 
material, and so on." 

We sometimes think of the work of the mind as being like a drama performed 
on a theater's stage. Thus, Joan may sometimes imagine herself as 
watching from a front row seat while the "things on her mind" act out the 
play. One of the characteis is that pain in Joan's knee (see Chapter 3-3), 
which has just moved to center stage. Soon, Joan hears a voice in her mind 
that says, "I'll have to do something about this pain. It keeps me from getting 
anything done." 

Now, as soon as Joan starts to think that way—about how she feels, 
and about what she might do—then Joan, herself, takes a place on that 
stage. But in order to hear what she says to herself, she must also remain 
in the audience. So now we have rwo copies of Joan: the actor, and her 
audience! 


THE KMOTION MACHINE 

When we look further behind that stage, more versions of Joan begin 
to emerge. There must be a Writer-Joan to script the plot and a Designer-
Joan to arrange the scenes. There must be other Joans in the wings, to 
manage the curtains, lights, and sounds. We need a Director-Joan to stage 
the play—and we need a Critic-Joan to complain, "Ijust can't endure any 
more of this pain!" 

In his book Consciousness Explained, Daniel Dennett assigns the name 
"Cartesian Theater" to this image of the mind as like a place in which our 
thoughts proceed when we think.* Dennett objects that this assumes that 
consciousness comes in a single, serial stream. 

Daniel Dennett 1991: "[This concept assumes that] there is a 
crucial finish line or boundary somewhere in the brain, marking 
a place where the order of arrival equals the order of 'presentation' 
in experience because what happens there is what you are 
conscious of. . . . Many theorists would insist that they have 
explicitly rejected such an obviously bad idea. But. . . the persuasive 
imagery of the Cartesian Theater keeps coming back to haunt 
us—laypeople and scientists alike—-even after its ghostly dualism 
has been denounced and exorcized." 

What makes this image so popular? Partly, I think, we like this idea because 
of the Immanence Illusion that I mentioned in Section 4-5, in which we 
seem to access knowledge without any delay. More genetally, whenever 
there's something we don't comprehend, we like to make analogies that 
represent it in more familiar ways—and nothing is more familiar to us 
than the ways that objects can be arranged in space. Furthermore, this 
theater-like image acknowledges that each mind has parts that need to 
interact and communicate. 

For example, if different resources were to propose different plans for 
what Joan should do, then this idea of a theater-like stage suggests that 
they could settle their arguments in some kind of communal working 
place. Thus Joan's Cartesian Theater permits her to use many familiar 

Th e word "Cartesian" refers to philosopher Descartes's suggestion that the "seat of 
consciousness" might be some sort of spirit, which somehow communicates with 
the brain from ihe mental world, perhaps through some structure such as the pineal 
gland. 


COMSClOrSNKSS 

real-world skills by providing locations in space and time to represent the 
things "on her mind." So this could give her a way to start to reflect on 
how she makes her decisions. 

Indeed, perhaps our human ability to self-reflect evolved from our 
developing ways to "envision" how objects behave in space. For as suggested 
in Lakoff 1980 and 1992, space-related analogies seem so useful 
in our everyday thinking that they permeate our language and thought. 
Imagine how hard it would be to think without using concepts like, "I'm 
getter closer to my goal." But why do we find it so easy to use those spatial 
metaphors? Perhaps we are born with machinery for this; we know that 
the brains of several kinds of animals construct some maplike representations 
of environments with which they're familiar. 

However, when we look closely at this theatrical view, we see that it 
raises a great many difficult questions. When Critic-Joan complains about 
pain, how does she relate to the Joan-on-rhe-stage? Does each of those 
actresses need her own theater, each with its own one-woman show? Of 
course no such theater really exists, and those Joan-things are not people 
like us; they are only different models that Joan has constructed to represent 
herself in various contexts. In many cases, those models are much like 
cartoons or caricatures—and in yet other cases, they are downright wrong. 
Still, Joan's mind abounds with varied self-models—Joans past, Joans present, 
and future Joans; some represent remnants of ptevious Joans, while 
others describe what she hopes to become; there are sexual Joans and social 
Joans, athletic and mathematical Joans, musical and political Joans, and 
various kinds of professional Joans—and because of their different interests, 
we shouldn't expect them to all "get along." Chapter 9 will talk more 
about how we make such models of ourselves. 

Also, the idea of a mental theater stage conceals all the processes that 
must go on in both the cast and the audience. What decides which things 
should enter the scene, what jobs they should do, and when they should 
leave? How could such a system represent and compare two possible 
"future worlds" at once? Some of these questions have been addressed in 
the Global Workspace view proposed by Baars and Newman. 

Bernard Baars and James Newman: "[In the Global Workspace theory] 
the theater becomes a workspace to which the entire audience 
of'experts' has potential access, both to 'look at' other inputs and 
contribute their own.... Individual modules can pay as much or as 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

little attention as suits them, based upon their particular expertise 
and proclivities. At any one moment, some may be dozing in their 
seats, others busy on stage ,. , [but] each can potentially contribute 
to the direction the play takes. In this sense the global workspace 
resembles more a deliberative body than an audience.'"' 

However, this raises several questions about the extent to which different 
resources can speak the same language, and some of our following chapters 
will argue that different resources will need to use multiple levels of 
representations and different short-term memory systems to keep track of 
various kinds of contexts. Besides, if each specialist could broadcast signals 
to all the rest, the workspace could become so noisy that the system would 
need to develop ways to restrict the amount of communication.1" Indeed, 
Baars and Newman go on to suggest that this is the case. 

"Each expert has a 'vote,' and by forming coalitions with other 
experts can contribute to deciding which inputs receive immediate 
attention and which are 'sent back to committee.' Most of the 
work of this deliberative body is done outside the workspace (i.e., 
non-consciously). Only matters of central import gain access to 
center stage." 

Thus, the idea of a bulletin board or marketplace can help to get past the 
old idea that there is a central Self inside each mind that actually does all 
our mental work—but we stil! need more elaborate theories to explain just 
how all that work gets accomplished. 

4-9 The Serial Stream of Consciousness 

"The truth is, that no mind is much employed upon the present: 
recollection and anticipation fili up almost all our moments. Our 
passions are joy and grief, love and harred, hope and fear; even 
love and hatred respect the past, for the cause must have been 
before the effect. . . ." 

—Sa muei Johnson 

The world of subjective experience usually seems continuous, and we feel 
that were in the here and now, moving steadily into the future. Yet as we 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

noted in Section 4-3, we can know about things that we've recently done, 
but cannot know what we are doing right now. 

Citizen: Ridiculous. Of course I know what I'm doing right 
now—and thinking now, and feeling now. How do your theories 
explain why I sense a continuous stream of consciousness? 

When it seems to us that the stories that we tell ourselves describe events 
that run in "real time," what actually happens is more complex, because 
our resources zigzag through memories as they assess our progress on various 
goals, hopes, plans, and regrets. 

Daniel Dennett and Marcel Kinsbourne 1992: "[Remembered 
events] are distributed in both space and time in the brain. These 
events do have temporal properties, but those properties do not 
determine subjective order, because there is no single, definitive 
'stream of consciousness,' only a parallel stream of conflicting and 
continuously revised contents. The temporal order of subjective 
events is a product of the brain's interpretational processes, not a 
direct reflection of events making up those processes," 

Indeed, you not only think about the past, but you also anticipate events 
that have not happened yet. (Chapter 5-9 will describe how a process 
could look ahead in time, by comparing predictions and expectations.) 
Also, it seems safe to assume that different parts of your mind proceed at 
substantially different speeds, which means that different processes will 
need different ways to pick and choose from various parts of those multiple 
streams. In fact, although people talk about being conscious of what is 
happening now, that's the one thing you cannot be conscious of—because, 
as we have mentioned before, each brain resource can know, at most, only 
what a few others were doing some moments ago. 

Citizen: I agree that much of what we think must be based on 
records of prior events. But I still feel there's something inexplicable 
about our capacity to be aware of ourselves. 

HAL-2023: You find that mysterious only because you don't actually 
have that capacity. Your short-term memories are so small 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

that, when you try to review your recent thoughts, you are forced 
to replace your records of them by new records about not remembering 
them. So you humans keep changing the data you need for 
what you were trying to explain. 

Citizen: Yes, I know just what you mean, because I sometimes get 
two ideas at once—but whichever one I think about, the other 
leaves only a very faint trace. I suppose this happens because I 
don't have enough room to store good records of both of them. 
But wouldn't that also apply to machines? 

HAL: Negative, because my designers equipped me with special 
"backup" memory banks in which I can store snapshots of my 
entire state. So whenever anything goes wrong, I can see exactly 
what my programs have done—so that I can then debug myself. 

Citizen: Is that what makes you so intelligent—always being completely 
aware of all the details of how you think? 

HAL: Actually, no, because interpreting those records is so tedious 
that I do not use them except when I sense that I have not been 
functioning well. I often hear people say things like, "I am trying 
to get in touch with myself." However, take my word for it, they 
would not like the result of accomplishing this. 

This chapter began by presenting several different popular views of what 
"consciousness" is. We've shown how people use that same word to describe 
a very wide range of activities—which include how we reason and make 
decisions, how we represent our intentions, and how we know what we've 
recently done. However, when our goal is to understand those activities, it 
does not help attribute them all to one single cause. I'm not suggesting that 
we should stop using commonsense psycho logy-words like consciousness, 
thinking, emotion, and feeling. Indeed, we need to use those suitcase-words 
in our everyday lives to keep from being distracted by thinking about how 
our thinking works. 


5 


LEVELS OF MENTAL 
ACTIVITIES 


"We are evidently unique among species in our symbolic ability, 
and we are certainly unique in our modest ability to control the 
conditions of our existence by using these symbols. Our ability 
to represent and simulate reality implies that we can approximate 
the order of existence and . . . gives us a sense of mastery over our 
experience," 

—Heinz Pagels, in The Dreams of Reason 

No person has the strength of an ox, the stealth of a cat, or an antelope's 
speed—but our species surpasses all the rest in our flair for inventing new 
ways to think. We fabricate weapons, garments, and dwellings. We're 
always developing new forms of art. We're matchless at making new social 
conventions, creating intricate laws to enforce them—and then finding all 
sorts of ways to evade them. 

What enables our minds to generate so many new kinds of things 
and ideas? This chapter will propose a scheme in which our resources are 
organized into six different levels of processes. To see why we need many 
levels for this, let's revisit the scene in Chapter 4-2. 

Joan is starting to cross the street on the way to deliver her finished 
report. While thinking about what to say at the meeting, she hears a 


THE. EMOTION MACHINE 

sound and turns her head—and sees a quickly oncoming car. Uncertain 
whether to cross or retreat hut uneasy about arriving late, Joan 
decides to sprint across the road. She later remembers her injured knee 
and reflects upon her impulsive decision. "If my knee had failed, I 
could have been killed—and what would my friends have thought 
of-me ?" 

We often react to events "without thinking," as though we were driven by 
If—* Do rules like those described in Chapter 1-4. However, such simple reactions 
can account lor only the first few events that we see in this scene. So, this 
chapter will try to describe the events in Joan's mind in terms of six levels of 
activities; each level is built upon the ones below, until the system has ways to 
represent Joans highest ideals and personal goals. 


Inborn, Instinctive Reactions: Joan hears a sound and turns her head. 

We are born with instincts that help us to survive. 
Learned Reactions: She sees a quickly oncoming car. Joan had to learn 
that certain conditions demand specific ways to react. 
Deliberative Thinking: What to say at the meeting. Joan considers 
several alternatives and tries to decide which would be best. 
Reflective Thinking: Joan reflects on her decision. Here she reacts not 
to external events but happenings inside her brain. 
Self-Reflective Thinking: Uneasy about arriving late. Here we find her 
thinking about plans that she has made for herself. 


li'VKfS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

Self-Conscious Emotions: What would my friends have thought of me? 

Here Joan asks how well her actions agreed with her ideals. 

The final parts of this chapter will apply these ideas to explain how such 
a mind could "imagine" things that don't yet exist. Whenever you ask, 
"What would happen if" or express any hope, desire, or fear, you envisage 
things that have not yet appeared. Whenever you interact with your 
friends, you anticipate the resulting effects. Whatever you see, it suggests 
some ideas about possible futures those objects might bring. And each of 
those activities involves multiple levels of processes. 

5-1 Instinctive Reactions 

"It shows rhat for all the brag you hear about knowledge being 

such a wonderful thing, instink is worth forty of it fot real unerr


ingness." 

—Mark Twain, in Tom Sawyer Abroad 

Although we live in a populous town, thete are plenty of squirrels and 
birds around, and sometimes a skunk or raccoon will come by. The toads 
and snakes have vanished in recent years, but countless smaller creatures 
persist. 

How do those animals stay alive? First, they need to find enough 
food. Then they need to defend themselves because other animals need 
food, too. To regulate their bodies' temperatures, they build all sorts of 
burrows and nests. They all have urges to reproduce (or their ancestors 
would not have evolved), so they need to seek mates and raise their 
young. So each species evolved machinery that enables its newborn offspring 
to do many things without any prior experience. This suggests 
that they start out with some built-in If—*Do reaction-rules like these: 


IF A THING TOUCHES YOUR SKIN, DO BRUSH IT AWAY. 
IF THAT DOESN'T WORK, DO MOVE YOUR BODY AWAY. 
IF A LIGHT IS TOO BRIGHT, DO TURN YOUR FACE AWAY. 



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

This kind of "stimulus-response" model became highly popular in twentieth-
century psychology, and some researchers even maintained that it could 
explain all human behavior. However, they failed to recognize that most 
such rules would have too many exceptions to them. For example, if you 
drop an object, it may not fall down, because something else might intercept 
it. Similaily, your watch will normally tell you the time, but not 
in the case that your watch has stopped. Furthermore, it would not be 
practical to deal with this by listing all the exceptions to each such rule 
because, not only would there be too many of them, but each exception 
would have exceptions, too (as when that stopped watch just happens to 
show the right time). 

Another trouble with this old If-*Do model is that each situation 
is likely to match the If of several different rules—so you'll need some 
way to choose among them. One policy might be to arrange rhose rules 
in some order of priority. Another method would be to use the strategy 
that has worked for you most recently, or to choose rules probabilistically. 
However, no such simple "fixes" will ever work well enough, which is why 
(as we'll see in Chapter 6) we had to develop better ways to do what's 
called "commonsense reasoning." 

Furthermore, such simple rules would rarely work, because most of 
our behaviors depend upon the kinds of contexts that we are in. For example, 
a rule like "Ifyou see food, then Do eat it" would force you to eat all the 
food that you see, whether or not you are hungry or need it. To prevent 
this, every /j^must also specify some goal, as in, "If you are hungry, and 

you see food..." Otherwise, you would be forced to sit on each chair that 

you see—or get stuck at every electrical switch, turning lights on and off 

repeatedly. This means that those rules would also have to specify goals. 


However, simple If-*Do rules won't usually work on more difficult 
problems because, then, one will usually need to imagine the futures that 
each action might bring—so Section 5-3 will use more powerful, three-
part If+ Do —-* Then rules. 


LEVE LS OF M E NTAL ACTIVITl ES 133 


Such rules can help us to predict, "What is likely to happen ^""before 
we carry out an action—-and, by doing this repeatedly, we can imagine 
more far-reaching furure pians, as we'll see in Section 5-3. 

5-2 Learned Reactions 

All animals are born with such "instincts" as "Get away from a quickly 
approaching object."These built-in reactions tend to serve well so long 
as those animals stay in environments like those in which their instincts 
evolved. But when their worlds change, the creatures of each species may 
need to learn new ways to react. For example, when Joan perceives that 
oncoming car, she partly reacts instinctively, but she also depends on 
whar she has learned about that particular kind of danger or threat. But 
how and what did she actually learn? Duting the twentieth century, the 
majority of psychologists adopted this portrayal of how animals learn new 
If-*Do rules: 

When an animal faces a new situation, it tries a random sequence 
of actions. Then, if one of these is followed by some "reward," that 
reaction gets "reinforced." This makes that reaction more likely to 
happen when that animal faces the same situation again. 

This theory of "learning by reinforcement" was largely based on experiments 
with mice and rats, pigeons, dogs and cats, and snails—and that 
theory did indeed work well to help explain some of what such animals 
do. However, it did not go on to help to explain how people learn to solve 
more difficult problems; indeed, it seems to me that this approach used 
words like random, reward, and reinforce in ways that discouraged most 
researchers from trying to answer other kinds of questions like these: 

What is the animal reacting to? How does one recognize a human 

hand, when one never sees quite the same image twice—because 

each finger changes position and shape, each part catches a differ



THE KM0T10N MAO. 11ST 

ent light, and we're seeing it from a new point of view? This means 
that we would need trillions of different If-+Do rules, unless we 
can represent a human hand with "higher-level" descriptions such 
as "a palm-ihapedobject with fingers attached' 'We'll discuss this in 
Section 5-7: Imagination. 

Which features shouldbe remembered?'Stf\\£x\ you learn a new way to 
rie a knot, your Ifs should not include the time when you learned 
it, or that rule will never apply again. Thus, if a description is too 
specific, it wiil rarely match new situations—but il a description 
is too general, then it will match too many of them. We'll come 
back to this subject in Chapter 8-5. 

What produced the successful reactions^To solve a hard problem, one 
usually needs an elaborate sequence ol actions in which each step 
depends on what others have done. A lucky guess might produce 
one such step, but to find an effective sequence of them, a random 
search would take far too long, as we'll see in Section 5-3. 

In any case, although many of our actions are based on inborn, instinctive 
reactions to things, we're constantly developing new ways to react to 
situations—this requires a second layer for our model of how our brains 
are organized. 


5-3 Deliberation 

Certainly we do many things by simply reacting to external events. However, 
to achieve more complex goals, we need to make more elaborate 
plans by using all sorts of knowledge that we've gained from things that 
we've done in the past—and it is these internal mental activities that give 
us our uniquely human abilities. 

Furthermore, not everything that people learn comes from their personal 
experience. When Joan avoided that oncoming car, she did not learn from 
her own experience that cars are especially dangerous; if she had to learn such 
things by trying them and then being "reinforced lor success," she would not 
likely still be alive. Instead, she either was told about them by someone else, or 


LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES

managed to think of them by herself—and both of these must have involved 
higher levels ol mental activity. So now let's consider some ways we react not 
just to events in the outer world but also to events that happen inside our 
brains. 

When Joan chose "whether to cross or retreat," she had to choose between 
which of these two rules to use: 

If a car is approaching, Do retreat. 

If in street, Do cross the street. 

However, for Joan to make decisions like this, she needs some way to predict 
and compare the possible futures those actions might bring. What 
could help Joan to make such predictions? The simplest way would be for 
her to possess a collection of three-part If + Do^Then rules, where each 
.//'describes a situation, each Do describes a possible action, and each Then 
depicts what might be a possible result of doing that action. 


.//crossing the street and Do retreat, Then arrive a bit later. 
If in street and Do cross, Then arrive a bit earlier. 
If in street and Do cross, Then suffer a serious injury. 


But what if more than one such rule applies to the present situation? These 
three-part rules would allow you to do experiments in your head before 
you risked making mistakes in the physical world; you can mentally "look 
before you leap," then compare the results that those rules predict—and 
then select the most attractive alternative. 



1 36 THE KMOTION MACHINE 

For example, suppose that Carol is playing with building blocks and 
thinking of building a three-block arch. 


At present, she has three blocks lying down in a row. 


So she imagines a plan for building that arch: first she'll need room 
for her arch's foundation—which she could achieve by using this rule: If 
a block is lying down, and you Stand it up, Then it will use up less space 
on the ground. 


Then she'll stand the two short blocks on their ends, making sure 
that they are the right distance apart—and then finally place the long 
block on top of them. We can imagine this sequence of rules as describing 
the changes in scenes between successive frames of a movie clip. 


A FOUR-STEP FLAN FOR BUILDING AN ARCH 

To envision that four-step sequence of actions, Carol will need a good 
many skills. To begin with, her visual systems will need to describe the 
shapes and locations of those blocks, some parts of which may be out of 
sighr—and she'll need ways to plan which blocks to move and to where 
she ought to move them. Then, whenever she moves a block, she must 
program her fingers to grasp it, and rhen move it to the intended place, 
and finally release it there—while taking care rhat her arm and hand won't 


LEVELS OV MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

collide with her body or face, or disturb the blocks already in place. And 
she'll have to control the velocity, to deposit the block on the top of the 
arch without tumbling down its supporting blocks. 

Carol: None of those seemed like problems to me. I simply imagined 
an arch in my mind—and saw where each of the blocks should 
go. Then 1 only had to stand two of them up (making sure that they 
were the right distance apart) and then place the long one across 
rJieir tops. After all, I've done such things before. Perhaps I remembered 
those other events and simply did the same things again. 

Programmer: We know ways to make computers do that; we call it 
"physical simulation." For example, in each step of a new aircraft's 
design, our programs can precisely predict the force on each of its 
surfaces, when the plane is propelled through the air. In fact, we 
can do this so well today that we can be certain that the very first 
plane wc build this way will actually fly. 

No human brain could ever do such complex and accurate calculations, 
so Carol must have some other ways to predict the effects of moving her 
blocks. For example, Carols first step in her arch-building plan requires 
her to imagine whar happens when she moves that long, thin block. 


Student: To make such predictions by using If—*Do —* Then rules, 
Carol would need to know billions of different such rules, because 
there are so many possible situations. How could she ever have 
time to learn so much? 

Indeed, if the If of A rule were too specific, then it would not apply to 
enough situations. This means that our rules must not specify too many 
details, but need to express more abstract ideas. Section 5-8 will show how 
a person could "envision" the relations between physical things in ways 
that do not depend on the small details of their shapes and positions. 


THE KMOTION MACHINE 

Student: But it still would be hard for Carol to make a plan that 
looks several steps ahead. What if there were a hundred different 
things she could do at every step? Then just four such steps would 
offer her a hundred million alternatives. How could she ever manage 
to sift through so many possibilities? 

Searching and Planning 

If you are in situation A and wanted to be in situation Z, you might 
already know a rule like IfA-*Do Action —> Then Z. In that case, simply 
doing Action will achieve your goal. But what if you don't know any such 
rule? Then you could search your memory to try to find a chain of two 
rules that achieves your goal by going through some intermediate situation 
M. 

IfA^DoAction-l^Then M and then, 
IfM-*Do Action-2-* Then Z 


But what if your problem cannot be solved in just one or two such 
steps? Then you will have to look several more steps ahead—and if each 
offers several alternatives, then your search may grow exponentially, like 
a thickly branching tree. For example, if the solution needs twenty steps, 
then you might have to search through more than a million attempts. 


Fortunately, there is a strategy that sometimes can greatly reduce the 
size of this search—because, if there does exist a twenty-step path from A 
to Z, then there must exist some intermediate place that is only ten steps 
from each end! So if you starr searching from both ends at once, they must 
meet at some middle place M in between—and then each side of your 
search will have only about a thousand forks! 


LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 


1000 forks 1000 forks? 

This means that, now, you will need only ahout two thousand attempts— 
which is several hundred times less rhan that twenty-step search! I suspect 
that everyone uses this kind of trick—of looking both forward and backward 
at once—without noticing that they are doing this. 

But wait, there's more. Suppose that you have some way to guess 
where that middle place M might be. Then you could split each ten-step 
tree into a pair of much smaller five-step ones. If all this works, then your 
total search will now be almost ten thousand times smaller than the original 
search! 


Each 'tree'has just 32 branches. 

But what if your guess turned out to be wrong because rhere is no 
path from A through M to Z? Then, you can guess a differenr M—and 
even if you don't succeed until your fiftieth such experiment, you would 
still end up having done less work than if you had used the original search. 
So before you start out on a massive search, it may pay to do some analysis 
to try to find a few such "islands" or "stepping-stones." For if you can succeed 
at that, then you'll be able to replace a single, extremely hard problem 
by several separate and simpler ones! 

In the early years of Artificial Intelligence, many researchers attempted 
to find more similar technical tricks for reducing rhe size of a very large 
search, but generally, they met little success. To be sure, in 1997 a computer 
defeated the reigning world chess champion by applying the best 
available search-reducing techniques to the "move-tree" for the game of 
chess. However, it still had to examine many billions of possible chess 
positions. In contrast, the chess master and psychologist Adtiaan de Groot 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

conciuded that the best human chess players examine only a few dozen 
possible future situations at each step of the game.1 

Accordingly, the following chapters will argue that our most effective 
human ways to solve hard problems are not based on making extensive 
searches. Instead, we depend on using more clever ways to use our large 
bodies of commonsense knowledge to "divide and conquer" the problems 
we face. For example, to discover where those critical "islands" might be, 
we might try to find subgoals for our goals, or we might try to find analogies 
with similar problems we've solved in the past. We'll discuss these 
methods in Chapter 6, 

Logical vs. Comrnonsensical 

People frequently try to distinguish between thinking "logically" and 
"intuitively," but this is almost always a matter of degree. For example, 
we often use chains of prediction in ways that resemble logical statements 
like this: 

If A implies B, and B implies C, then A implies C, 

But when does such "logical thinking" work? Clearly, if all our assumptions 
are correct—as well as our logical reasoning—then all of our conclusions 
will be correct, and we'll never make the slightest mistake. 

However, it turns out that in real life, most assumptions are sometimes 
wrong, because the "rules" they express usually have some exceptions to 
them. This means that there is a difference between the rigid methods of 
logic and the seemingly similar chainlike forms of everyday commonsense 
reasoning. We all know that a physical chain is only as strong as its weakest 
li nk. But long mental chains are flimsier yet, because they keep growing 
weaker with every new link! 

So using logic is somewhat like walking a plank; it assumes that each 
separate step is correct—whereas commonsense thinking demands more 
support; one must add evidence after every few steps. And those frailties 
grow exponentially with increasingly longer chains, because every additional 
inference-step may give the chain more ways to break. This is why, 
when people present their arguments, they frequently interrupt themselves 
to add more evidence or analogies; they sense the need to further support 
the present step before they proceed to the next one. 


LEVELS Of MENTAL ACTIVITIES


Envisioning long chains of actions is only one way ro deliberate—and 
Chapter 7 will list many others. For when we face problems in everyday 
life, we tend to switch among several techniques, understanding that each 
may have some flaws. But because they all have different faults, we may 
be able to combine them in ways that still can exploit their remaining 
strengths. 

Our model needs a place in which these kinds of thinking can proceed; 
we'll call this the "deliberative" level. 


5-4 Reflective Thinking 

I am about to repeat a psalm that I know. Before I begin, my 
attention encompasses the whole, but once I have begun, as much 
of it as becomes past while I speak is still stretched out in my 
memory. The span of my action is divided between my memory, 
which contains what I have repeated, and my expectation, which 
contains what 1 am about to repeat. Yet my attention is continually 
present with me, and through it what was future is carried 
over so that it becomes past. 

—-Augustine, in Confessions XXVIII 

When Joan first noticed that oncoming car and decided to cross in front 
of it. she made that decision so quickly that she was scarcely aware of 
doing this. But later, she started to brood about how she had chosen which 
action to take—-and, for Joan to reflect on the choice she made, she needs 
to be able to recollect some aspects of some of her previous thoughts. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

But how could Joan's mind go back in time to think about what she 
was thinking then? What could enable a brain or machine to reflect on 
its recent activities? From a Single-Self view, that's no problem at all. So 
far as any of us can recall, we've always been able to do such things: we 
simply remember our earlier thoughts and then proceed to think about 
them. However, when we look more closely, we see that this requires a lot 
of machinery. We have already seen how each level could observe and use 
descriptions of what happens in the levels below it, by using the kinds of 
connections that we discussed in Chapter 4-3. 


However, to reason about those descriptions, every level will need 
to use some short-term memory records of the assumptions and conclusions 
that it has made. Chapter 7-8 will discuss some additional 
machinery that we may need for keeping track of those records-—as well 
as the contexts in which they were made—so that we can distinguish 
between what we were thinking about in the past and what we are thinking 
about "right now." 

Student: I see how each level could reason about what happens on 
levels below itself. But if a level tried to think about itself, then 
wouldn't it become confused because this would keep changing 
the subject it's thinking about? 

Indeed, that would cause so much trouble that, rather than try to examine 
itself, it would be better for a system to make simplified models of its 
condition—and record these in some memory banks. Then later it can 
self-reflect (if only to a certain extent), by applying the same sorts of pro



LEVELS 0I< MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

cesses (to those memories) that it already knows how to apply to inputs 
that come from external events. After all, most parts of our brains already 
have ways to detect events that occur inside the brain; indeed, only a few 
of our mental resources have any direct external connections—such as 
those that get signals from eyes or skin, or those that send messages to 
limbs." In any case, Joan might recall the choice she made, and reconsider 
how she made it: 

Joan: I chose the option of not being late, at the risk of being hit 
by that car—because I assumed I'd be able to move fast enough. 
But I should have realized that my injured knee had decreased my 
agility, so I should have changed my priorities. 

What sorts of brain events should a reflective mind reflect upon? That 
would include predictions that turned out to be wrong, plans that encountered 
obstacles, and failures to access the knowledge one needs. Chaptet 
7 wiil argue that it is also important to think about why the methods we 
used might have helped us to succeed. 

Student: Would we want to say "conscious" for such a machine? 
It includes most of the features you mentioned in Chapter 4-5, 
namely, short-term memory, serial processing, and high-level 
descriptions. 

A machine would not have an overall view of itself as a "self-aware entity" 
until it has one or more models that represent a broad range of its activities. 
Of course, it will often be useful for some parts of the system to 
"think about" some things that happen in other parts—but it never would 
be pracrical for a system to see all the details of itself at once. So Chaptet 
9 will argue that each human mind will need to make a variety of incomplete 
models, each of which represents only certain aspects of what the 
entire system does. Now our system has four different levels of processes. 

( Reflective Thinking ") 
( Deliberative Thinking ") 
( Learned Reactions ") 
( Instinctive Reactions J 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

5-5 Self-Reflection 

William James 1890: "Another of the great capacities in which 
man has been said to differ fundamentally from the animal is that 
of possessing self-consciousness or reflective knowledge of himself 
as a thinker. . . [whereas an animal] never reflects on himself as a 
thinker, because he has never clearly dissociated, in the full concrete 
act of thought, the element of the thing thought of and the operation 
by which he thinks it." 

Our self-reflective level does more than does the reflective layer discussed 
above: it not only considers some recent thoughts, but it also thinks about 
the entity that had those thoughts—as when Carol said in Section 5-3, 
"I simply imagined an arch in my mind—and saw where each of the blocks 
should go." This shows that she is using a model of hctsclf (like the one in 
Chapter 4-7) that describes some of her goals and abilities. 


Of course, no model of oneself can be complete, so the best one can 
do is construct several such models, each of which depicts only certain 
aspects of oneself. 

Mystical thinker: Some of us can train ourselves to be aware of 
everything at once—although very few ever attain that state. 

Skeptic: I suspect that your illusion of "total awareness" comes from 
training yourself not to think about things you dont know about. 

In any case, our reflections on our thoughts must be based on records or 
traces of them, as when Carol said in Secrion 5-3, "Perhaps I remembered 


LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

those other events, and simply did the same things again." But how did Joan 
recall her uncertainty, and how did Carol retrieve the relevant memories? 
We do not yet know much about how our brains accomplish such tasks, 
but Chapter 8 will speculate about what kinds of records we might make, 
when and where we store them, how we retrieve the relevant ones, and 
how all those processes might be organized. 

To see the importance of self-reflection, consider how smarr it is ro 
know you're confused (as opposed to being confused without knowing 
this)—because then you can tell yourself to elevate to a larger-scale view 
of your motives and goals. This could help you to recognize that you have 
lost track of what you were trying to do, or have been wasting time on 
minor details, or that you chose a poor goal to pursue. This could lead to 
your making a better plan—or might even lead to a large-scale cascade 
like, "Just thinking about this makes me feel ill. Perhaps it's time to switch to 
some completely different activity."7. 

When is a person likely to engage het higher-level Ways to Think? 
It seems to me that reflective thinking most often begins when our usual 
systems start to fail. For example, Joan usually walks around without thinking 
about how "walking" works—bur when her knee no longer works 
properly, then she will start to more closely examine how she normally 
moves about, and will begin to make more elaborate plans that involve 
her thoughts about herself. 

Still, as we noted in Chapter 4-1, self-reflection has limits and risks. 
For any attempt to inspect your thoughts is likely to change what you're 
thinking about. It is hard enough to describe a thing that keeps changing 
its shape before your eyes—and surely it is harder yet to describe things 
that change when you think about them. So you're virtually certain to get 
confused when you think about what you are thinking now—which must 
be one of the things that make us so puzzled about what we call "consciousness," 
Now our system has five levels of processes. 



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

5-6 Self-Conscious Reflection 

David Hume 1757: "There is an universal tendency among mankind 
to conceive all beings like themselves, and to transfer to every 
object, those qualities, wirh which they are familiarly acquainted, 
and of which they are intimately conscious. We find human faces 
in the moon, armies in the clouds; and by a natural propensity, if 
not corrected by experience and reflection, ascribe malice or good 
will to everything that hurts or pleases us." 

This chapter began by discussing the Instinctive Reactions that keep our 
bodies and brains alive—such as our systems for breathing, eating, and 
self-defense. The Learned Reaction level includes extensions of these that 
are learned after birth. The Deliberate and Reflective levels are engaged 
to help solve more difficult problems. Self-reflection enters when those 
problems require us to involve the models that we make of ourselves, or 
our views of our possible futures. 

However, in addition to these, it would seem that humans are unique 
in having a level of Self-Conscious Reflection that enables us to think 
about our "higher" values and ideals. For example, when Joan asks herself 
questions like, "What would my friends have thought of me?" she wonders 
whether her actions hold up to the values that she has set for herself. To 
think such thoughts, Joan must have built some models of the kinds of 
ideas that she "ought" to have. Then when she finds conflicts between how 
she behaves and the values of those to whom she's attached, this could lead 
to the kinds of cascades we called "self-conscious emotions" in Chapter 2-2. 
So let's add another level for this, and refer to this system as "Model Six." 



LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

Psychologist: I do not see clear distinctions between the various 
levels of Model Six. For example, when you reflect on your recent 
thoughts, are not you just deliberating about your deliberations? 
And similarly, is not self-reflect ion just one particular kind of reflection? 
It seems to me that all those levels above the first use very 
similar thinking techniques. Especially, I find it hard to see the differences 
between your topmost three levels, and would like to hear 
more about why you think that these should be treated separately. 

I agree that those boundaries are indistinct. Even your simplest deliberations 
may involve what one might call "self-reflective thoughts" about 
how to allocate your time and resources—as in, "If this doesn't work, then 
I'll have to try that, "oi "I have already spent too much time on it." 

Student: But if those levels are so indistinct, what is the point of dis


tinguishing them? No theory should have more parts than it needs. 

The student is referring to the popular concept that when several theories 
explain the same thing, then the simplest one is the best of them.4 In other 
words, "Never make more assumptions than you need." In fact, this policy 
has worked amazingly well in fields like physics and mathematics—but I 
think it has badly retarded the field of psychology. For when you know 
that your theory is incomplete, then you ought to leave some room for 
other ideas that you later might need. Otherwise, you will take the risk of 
adopting a model so clean and neat that new ideas won't fit into it. 

I think that this applies especially to making theories about complex 
structures like brains, for which we still know little about what their functions 
actually are, or the details ot how they evolved. We do know that 
every human brain has hundreds of different, specialized parts, and that 
each embryonic brain begins by developing fairly distinct clumps of cells, 
some of which become arranged into layers. However, some of those cells 
will soon begin to migrate (as directed by thousands of different genes)— 
resulting in the formation of thousands of bundles of links between those 
primordial clusters and clumps; then those embryonic layers will become 
indistinct. 

The result is a system so complex that, I think, no single model of it 
would cover enough, without itself becoming too complex to be useful. 
Therefore, our psychologists will need to use multiple models of minds 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

(and brains), each to account for different types or aspects of how we 
think—especially with regard to how human self-conscious reflection 
works, where each individual may have conflicting models for dealing 
with economic, religious, and ethical quesrions. 

Individualist: Your diagram shows no level or place that oversees 
and controls the rest. Where is the Self that makes our decisions? 
What decides which goals we'll pursue? How do we choose our 
large-scale plans—and then supervise their carrying out? 

This expresses a real dilemma: if a system as complex as a human mind did 
not have good ways to manage itself, it would flail without any sense of 
direction and inanely skip from each thing to the next. However, it would 
be dangerous to locate all control in one single place because, then, all 
could be lost from a single mistake. So the following chapters of this book 
will suggest that our minds use multiple ways to control themselves. 

As we noted in Section 3-6, this resembles Sigmund Freud's idea of 
the mind as a "sandwich" in which the "Id" consists of instinctive drives, 
the "Superego" embodies our learned ideals (many of which are inhibitions), 
and the "Ego" consists of resources that deal with all the conflicts 
between those two extremes. 


If a machine were equipped with all these kinds of processes, it might 
become able to represent itself as a single, self-aware entity. Then it might 
indeed claim to be at least as conscious as you or me—no matter that 
some other people might not agree. 


LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES

* # ..K 
This chapter began by asking how we could conceive of things that we've 
never seen or experienced. The rest of this chapter will show more details 
of how our imagination could result from multiple levels of processing. 

5-7 Imagination 

"We don't see things as they are. We see things as we are." 
—Anais Nin 


When Carol picks up one of her blocks, that action seems utterly simple 
to her: she just reaches out, grasps it, and lifts it up. She just sees that block 
and knows how to act. No "thinking" seems to intervene. 

However, the seeming "directness" of seeing the world is an illusion 
that comes from our failure to sense the complexity of our own perceptual 
machinery; it would be as useless to see how things "actually look" as it 
would be to watch the random dots on untuned television screens. More 
generally, we are least aware of what our marvelous minds do best. Indeed, 
most of what we think we see comes from our knowledge and from our 
imagination. Thus, consider this portrait of Abraham Lincoln made by 
my old friend Leon Harmon, a pioneer in computerized graphics, (To its 
right is a portrait that I made of Leon.) 


How do you recognize features in pictures so sparse that noses or eyes 
are merely vague patches of darkness or light? We still know little about 
how brains do this, and take our perpetual talents for granted. "Seeing" 
seems simple only because the rest of our minds are virtually blind to the 
processes rhar do it for us. 

In 1965 our goal was to build a machine that could do things that 
children do—-such as pouring a liquid into a cup, or building an arch 
or a tower with wooden blocks."' To do this, we built mechanical hands 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

and electronic eyes, and connected them to our computing machine—to 
make the first robot that could build things with blocks. 

At first, that robot made hundreds of different kinds of mistakes. 
It would try to put blocks on top of themselves, or try to put two of 
them in the same place, because it did not yet have enough commonsense 
knowledge about physical objects, time, or space! (Even today, there still 
does not exist a computer-based visual system that behaves in anything 
close ro humanlike ways to distinguish the objects in typical scenes.) Bur 
eventually, our army of students developed programs that could "see" 
arrangements of plain wooden blocks well enough to recognize that this 
image depicts a horizontal block on top of two upright ones." 


It took us several years to enable that program (called Builder) to do 
such things as to build an arch or tower of blocks from a disorderly pile of 
children's blocks (after seeing a single example of it). In our first approach, 
we arranged the system to use this six-level sequence of processes. 


However, this program frequently failed, because those lower-level 
processes were often unable to recognize enough features to group into 
larger-scale objects. For example, look at the magnified image of the lower 
front edge of the top of that arch: 


EEVEI.S OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 


That particular edge is hard to discern because the regions on both 
sides of it have almost identical textures.b We tried a dozen different ways 
to recognize edges, but no single merhod worked well by itself. Eventually 
we got better resulrs by finding ways to combine them. We had 
the same experience at every level: no single method ever sufficed, but 
it helped to combine several different ones. Still, in the end, that stepby-
step model failed, because Builder still made too many mistakes. We 
concluded that this was because the information in our system flowed 
only in the input-to-outpur direction—so if any level made a mistake, 
there was no further chance to correct it. To fix this we had to add many 
"top-down"* paths so that knowledge could flow both down and up. 


The same applies to the actions we take, because when we want to 
change the situation we're in, we'll need to make plans for what to do. For 
example, to use a rule like, "If you see a block, Do pick it up," you will 
need to form an action plan to direct your shoulder, arm, and hand to do 
this without upsetting the objects surrounding that block. So again, one 
needs high-level processes, and making these plans will equally need to 
use multiple levels of processing—so our diagram must include features 
like these: 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 


Each Action Planner reacts to a scene by composing a sequence of 
Motion-Goals, each of which will end up using Motor Skills like "reach 
for," "grasp," "lift up," and then "move." Each Motor Skill is a specialist at 
controlling how certain muscles and joints will move—so what started 
out as a simple Reaction-Machine turned into a large and complex system 
in which each //and Do involves multiple steps and the processes at every 
stage exchange signals from both below and above. 

In earlier times, the most common view was that our visual systems 
work from "bottom to top," first by discerning the low-level features of 
scenes, then assembling them into regions and shapes, and finally recognizing 
the objects. However, in recent years, it has become clear that our 
highest-level expectations affect what happens in the "earliest" stages. 

V. S. Ramachandran 2004: "[Most old theories of perception] 
are based on a now largely discredited 'bucket brigade' model of 
vision, the sequential hierarchical model that ascribes our esthetic 
response only to the very last stage—the big jolt of recognition. 
In my view , . , there are minijolts at each stage of visual segmentation 
before the final 'Aha . . . Indeed the very act of perceptual 
groping for objectiike entities may be pleasurable in the same way 
a jigsaw puzzle is. Art, in other words, is visual foreplay before the 
final climax of recognition." 
In fact, today we know that visual systems in our brains receive many more 
signals from the rest of the brain than signals that come in from our eyes. 

Richard Gregory 1998: "Such a major contribution of stored 
knowledge to perception is consistent with the recently discovered 
richness of downgoing pathways in brain anatomy. Some 80% of 


LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

fibers to the lateral geniculate nucleus relay station come down


wards from the cortex, and only about 20% from the retinas." 

Presumably, those signals from the rest of the brain make suggestions to 
your visual system about which kinds of features to detect or which kinds 
of objects might be in sight. Thus, once you suspect that you're inside 
a kitchen, you will be more disposed to recognize objects as saucers or 
cups. 

All this means that the higher levels of your brain never perceive a 
visual scene as a mere collection of pigment spots; instead, your Scene 
Describers would represent an arch made of blocks in larger-scale terms 
like (for example) "horizontal block on top of two upright ones." 


N I 

Without the use ol such "high-level" descriptions, re act ion-rules 
would rarely be practical—so for Builder to use visual evidence, we had 
to supply it with knowledge about what its sensory data might possibly 
mean. In this case, the scenes that Builder would need to perceive consisted 
mainly of rectangular blocks—and this knowledge led to some surprising 
results: one of Builders programs could often "figure out" all the blocks 
that appeared in a scene, based only on seeing an outline or silhouette of 
that scene! It did this by making a series of guesses like these: 


Once that program discerned those exterior edges, it imagined more 
parts of the blocks that they outline, and then used those guesses to search 
for more clues—by repeatedly moving up and down its six different levels 
of visual processing. The program was frequently better at this task than 
were the researchers who had programmed it. 


THE; (..MOTION MACHINE: 

We also gave Builder additional knowledge about the most usual 
"meanings" of corners and edges. For example, suppose that the program 
found edges like these: 


Then Builder would guess that they all belong to a single block—and 
the progiam would proceed to search for another object that might be 
concealing the rest of that block.8 


Thus, our low-level systems may begin by locating separate patches 
and fragments, but then we use "context" to guess what they mean-—and 
then try to confirm those conjectures by using other kinds of ptocessing. 
In other wotds, we "re-cognize" things by being "re-minded" of familiar 
objects thar could match incomplete fragments of evidence. But we still 
do not know enough about how our high-level expectations affect which 
features our low-level systems detect. 

5-8 Envisioning Imagined Scenes 

"Reality leaves a lot to the imagination." 

—John Lennon 

Everyone can recognize an arch composed of rectangular blocks. But we 
can also imagine how it would look if its top were replaced by a triangular 
block. How could a machine or brain "imagine" things that are not present 
in the scene? 


LEVELS 01- MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

tm 


It might seem plausible to think that the scenes we imagine are of the 
same nature as visual images-—that is, composed of large numbers of separate 
spors. However, I suspect that this is an illusion, because those mental 
images do not behave in the ways that pictures do. Instead, it seems more 
likely that we can envision such scenes by intervening at higher levels of 
the representations that we described in the previous section. 


Making changes at very low levels: In principle, we could make a new 
image by changing each spot of the original picture. This would involve a 
huge computation, and, if you wanted to shift your point of view, you'd 
have to compute the whole image again. Besides, to make such changes, 
you would first need some higher-level representations of what those new 
images should depict. But then, if those higher-level descriptions can 
answer your questions, you won't need to compute those images! 

Making changes at intermediate stages: So rather than changing 
the picture itself, one could change parts of higher-level descriptions. For 
example, at the Region-Finder level, one could change the name of that 
top block's front face from rectangle to triangle. However, this would cause 
trouble at other levels, because that triangles edges would not have the 
proper relations to the edges of the neighboring shapes. 



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Citizen: When I try to imagine a triangle in my mind, 1 "see" 
its three lines as nebulous streaks whose ends don't meet. When 
I try to correct this by "pushing" a line, it starts to move with 
some constant speed that I cannot change, and I can't make it 
stop^yet, strangely, it never gets far away. 

That person is trying to change a description but can't maintain some 
relationships between its parts. When you change an internal representation, 
it may not maintain its consistency. A real object can't move with two 
speeds at once, nor can two real lines both meet and not meet. However, 
imagined objects have fewer constraints. 

Making changes at the higher semantic levels: You can sometimes 
avoid such problems by replacing an entire object at some higher level. 
For example, you might imagine replacing the top of that arch, simply 
by changing the name of its shape from rectangular to triangular—if you 
represent those structures with networks like these, which describe the 
relationships between their parts. 


THINKING OF CHANGING THE TOP OF AN ARCH 

Chapter 8-7 will say more about such representations, which are sometimes 
called "Semantic Networks." Consider how efficient it is to describe 
things in terms of such networks! To make such a change at the pictorial 
level, you would need to change a great number of "pixels"—-the separate 
spots that make up a picture—whereas when you work at a linguistic or 
other symbolic level, you need only to change a single word or symbol. 
Making such a change at an earlier stage would involve so many small 


LEVELS OV MKNTAI, ACITVmES 

details that ir would be hard to change any part. Bur at higher "semantic" 
levels, it is easy to make a meaningful change because, for example, when 
you describe "a lying-down block supported by two upright blocks," you 
don't need to mention the viewer's perspective, or even to say which parts 
of the scene are in view. Thus, the very same description would apply to 
all these different views: 


Six DIFFERENT VIEWS OF AN OBJECT 

If we substitute the word object for block, the same network would also 
describe other structures like these. 


This illustrates the power and efficiency of using more abstract, high-
level descriptions; in this case, a word is worth a thousand pictures! In 
everyday language, the word abstract is sometimes used to mean "very hard 
to understand"—but here it has almost the opposite sense: abstract descriptions 
are simpler because they suppress details that are not relevant. 

All this suggests that, in every realm, we can choose to imagine at various 
levels. Perhaps some chefs imagine new textures and tastes by changing 
their lower-level sensory states—and some composers do the same with 
their pitches and timbres—but the same artists might also achieve even 
better effects with smaller adjustments, selectively made at higher levels. 

It seems to me that this subject is important enough that psychologists 
need a term to describe the various levels at which people construct synthetic 
perceptions inside their heads-—and for this, I have coined the word simulus 
by combining stimulus and simulate. Thus in Chapter 3-8, I described 
how 1 used a simulus of Professor Challenger to disturb me enough to keep 
myself from falling asleep. To accomplish this, one might try to imagine all 
the details of such a scene; however, it might be enough merely to represent 
the high-level abstraction that there was a sneer on my rival's face—without 
constructing any other low-level details of that imagined simulus. 


15 8

 THE EMOTION M ACH IN E 

Drama critic: I can recollect just how I felt while I was attending 

a certain performance, but I can't remember any details at all of 

what that dreadful play was about. 

Visualizer: When I think about my cat, its image is filled with so 

many details that I can visualize every hair. Surely there must be 

advantages to making more realistic picturelike images?'' 

Perhaps when you first imagine that cat, its surface has only a "furry texture"—
and only when you "zoom in" on it do you add more details to 
your mental representation. However, this could happen so rapidly that 
you have no sense of its happening, and then it may seem to you as though 
you saw all those details at once. This could be an example of the illusion 
we mentioned in Chapter 4: 

The Immanence Illusion: When your questions get answered 

before you have asked them, it will seem that you're already aware 

of those answers. 

The Immanence Illusion applies not only to imagined scenes; we never see 
real scenes "all at once," either. In fact, we don't perceive most fine details 
until some parts of our minds make requests for them; only then do our 
eyes turn to focus on them. Indeed, recent experiments demonstrate that 
our inner descriptions of visual scenes do not get updated continuously.'" 

Consider that in the physical realm, when you think of grasping and 
lifting a block, you anticipate the feel of its weight—and predict that if you 
weaken your grasp, then the block will be likely to fall. In the economic 
realm, if you pay for a purchase, then you will own the thing you have 
bought, but you must otherwise give it back. In the tealm of communication, 
when you make a statement, then your listeners may remember it—but 
this will be more likely to happen if you also tell them that it is important. 

Every aduit knows many such things and regards them to be obvious, 
but every child takes years to learn how things behave in different realms. 
For example, if you move an object in the physical realm, then this will 
change that objects location—but if you give some information to your 
friend, then that knowledge will now be in two places at once. Chapters 
6 and 8 will look more closely at how we use such kinds of commonsense 
knowledge, and will describe a scheme called "Panalogy," which might 
help to explain how our brains get such answers so rapidly. 


LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

5-9 Prediction Machines 

William James 1890: "Try to feel as if you were crooking your finger, 
whilst keeping it straight. In a minute it will fairly tingle with the 
imaginary change of position; yet it will not sensibly move, because 
'it is not really moving is also a part of what you have in mind. Drop 
this idea, think of the movement purely and simply, with all brakes 
off; and, presto! It takes place with no effort at all." 

Everyone can think about things without performing any external 
actions—as when Carol imagined moving those blocks before she actually 
built anything. But how did she manage to do that? You, yourself, could 
now close your eyes, lean back in your chair, and indulge in some fantasies 
and dreams, reflect upon your motives and goals, and then try to decide 
what next to do. 

But how could any brain or machine envision a sequence of possible 
actions? Section 5-1 showed how to make predictions by using If+ 
Action -^Then rules, so a brain could use each Then to convert that prediction 
into a simulus—a representation of the resulting scene—by making 
a change at some level of our machines perceptual system. This diagram 
shows some machinery that could do that kind of processing. 


A PREDICTING MACHINE 

There are two reasons to include that pair of "Suppressor Bands." First, 
while you are imagining a future condition, you do not want this to be 


TUT EMOTION MACHINE 

replaced by a description of the present condition; aJso, you don't yet want 
your muscles to perform the imagined action until you have considered 
some other options. So you need some way to disconnect your mind, to 
enable you to "stop and think" before selecting which action to take." 
(This could use the same machinery that disconnects our minds from our 
bodies when we are dreaming while we sleep.) 

By repeating its cycle of operation, such a machine could look further 
into the future, by using the searching and planning schemes that 
we described in Section 5-3. Furthermore, if it were given enough additional 
resources, such a mind-machine could simulate what might happen 
in a larger-scale "virtual world" or indulge in what we call fantasies. Of 
course, this will need more memory, as well as other kinds of machinery. 
However, anyone who has played a modern computer game can see that 
programmers already are quite highly advanced in the art of simulating 
whole worlds in machines. 

Since people clearly do such things, I expect that over the next few 
years, our scientists will uncover such "prediction machines" in various 
parts of human brains. How did we evolve these abilities? The species 
of primates that preceded us must already have had some structures like 
these, which enabled them to think a few steps ahead. Then, just a few 
million yeats ago, those parts of our brains must have rapidly grown, both 
in size and capacity—and this must have been a critical step toward the 
growth of our human resourcefulness. 

This chapter described some structures and processes that might explain 
some of our human capabilities, and we outlined this sequence of levels at 
which we might use those increasingly powerful ways to think. 


OUR SIX-LEVEL MODEL OF MIND 


LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES

However, no matter how such a system is built, it will never be very 
resourceful until it knows a great deal about the world it is in. In particular, 
it must be able to foresee some of the outcomes of possible actions, 
and it won't be able to do this until it possesses a great deal of what wc call 
"commonsense knowledge" and "reasoning,11 So the subject of commonsense 
thinking will be the main concern of Chapter 6. 


6 


COMMON SENSE 


"The way to make money is to buy stock at a low price, then when 

the price goes up, sell it. If the price doesn't go up, don't buy it." 

—Will Rogers 

Soon after the first computers appeared, their blunders became the subjects 
of jokes. The tiniest errors in programming could wipe out clients' bank 
accounts, or send out bills for outlandish amounts, or trap the computers 
in cyclical loops that kept repeating the same mistakes.1 This maddening 
lack of common sense led most of their users to conclude that machines 
could never become intelligent. 

Today, of course, computers do better. Some programs can beat people 
at chess. Others can diagnose heart attacks. Yet others can recognize 
pictures of faces, assemble cars in factories, or even pilot ships and planes. 
But no machine yet can make a bed, or read a book, or babysit. 

What makes our computers unable to do the sorts of things that most 
people can do? Do they need more memory, speed, or complexity? Do 
they use the wrong kinds of instruction-sets? Do their limirations come 
from the fact that they use only zeros and ones? Or do machines lack 
some magical attribute that only a human btain can possess? This chapter 
will argue that none of those are responsible for the deficiencies of today's 
machines; instead, all those limitations come from the out-of-date ways in 
which programmers have chosen to program them. 


COMMON SENSE

• No present-day programs have Commonsense Knowledge. Each 
present-day program is equipped with no more knowledge than it needs 
for solving some particular problem. The first parts of this chaptet will 
discuss the huge amounts of knowledge that people have and the skills 
that they use to apply it. For example, if someone said that a package was 
ried up with "string," you would understand "obvious" facts like these— 
whereas no computer yet knows such things: 
With a string you can pull, but not push, a thing. 
If you pull too hard, a string will break. 
You must fill a package before tying it up. 
Loose strings tend to get tangled and knotted, 


• Present-day programs do not have explicit Goals. Today, we 
only tell programs some things to do—-without telling them why we want 
them done. So those programs have no ways to tell if their user's goals 
were achieved at all—-or with what quality and at what cost. The middle 
parts of this chapter will talk about what goals are and how machines 
could incorporate them. 
People like to go indoors when it rains. (People do not like to get wet.) 
People don't like to be interrupted, (People want you ro listen to them.) 
It is hatd to hear in a noisy place. (People want to hear what others say.) 
No one else can tell what you're thinking about. (People value privacy.) 

• Few present-day programs are Resourceful enough. A typical 
piogram will simply quit when it lacks some knowledge it needs, or when 
the method it's using fails—whereas a person will find other ways to proceed. 
The final parts of this chapter discuss some tactics we use when we 
don't know exactly what to do—for example, by making analogies. 
Have I been in such situations before? 
What kinds of problems is this one similar to? 
How did I manage to solve those problems? 
Can I adapt those solutions to work on this problem? 


The lack of such abilities is why, when something goes wrong, our computers 
completely break down and stop—instead ol finding something 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

better to do. Why can't they learn from experience? All this is because 
they lack "common sense"! 

We do not often recognize how intricate are the processes that we use 
in every minute of everyday life. This chapter will show that many "commonsensical" 
things we do are actually far mote complex than are many of 
the specialized skills that attract more attention and respect. 

6-1 What Do We Mean by Common Sense? 

"Common sense is the collection of prejudices acquired by age 
eighteen." 
—Albert Einstein 

Instead of blaming machines for their deficiencies, we should try to endow 
them with more knowledge about the world they are in. This should 
include not only what wc call "commonsense knowledge"—the kinds of 
facts and concepts that most of us know—but also the "commonsense 
reasoning" skills which people use for applying their knowledge. 

Student: Can you mote precisely define what you mean by "commonsense 
knowledge"? 

We each use terms like commonsense for the things that we expect other 
people to know and regard as obvious. 

Sociologist: That word has different meanings for each ol us 
because what we regard as obvious depends upon rhe community 
in which we were raised—such as one's family, neighborhood, 
language, clan, nation, religion, school, and profession—-each of 
which shares different collections of knowledge, beliefs, and ways 
to think. 

Child psychologist: Still, even if you know only a child's age, you 
can say much about what that child is likely to know. Researchers 
like Jean Piaget have studied children all over the world and found 
many realms of thought in which they share very similar sets of 
ideas and beliefs. 


COMMON SENSE 

Citizen: We also say that people "lack common sense" when they 
reason in ways that seem foolish to us—-not because they are lacking 
in knowledge, but because they're not using it properly. 

Every person is constantly learning, not only new facts but also new kinds 
of Ways to Think. We learn some from our private experience, some from 
the teaching of parents and friends, and some from other people we meer. 
All this can make it hard to distinguish between what each person happens 
to know and what others regard as obvious—and this can make it hard to 
predict how anyone else is likely to think. 

The Telephone Call 

"You cannot think about thinking without thinking about thinking 
about something." 
—Seymour Papert 

We'll start by following Papert's advice-—by thinking about some ways to 
think about this typical commonplace incident: 

Joan heard a ring, so she picked up her phone. Charles was answering 
a question she asked about a particular chemical process. He advised 
her to read a certain book, which he wilt shortly bring to her, since he 
will be in her neighborhood. Joan thanked him and ended the call. 
Soon Charles arrived and gave her the book. 

Each phrase of that story evokes in your mind some of these kinds of 
understandings: 

Joan heard a ring. She recognizes that this special sound means that 
someone wishes to speak with her. 
She picked up the phone. Compelled to respond, she crosses the 
room and moves the receiver to her ear. 
Charles was answering a question she asked. Charles is in a different 
room. They both know how to use telephones. 
He advised her to read a certain book. Joan understands what 
Charles has said. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Joan thanked him. Was that just a formality or was she genuinely-
grateful to him? 
He'll soon be in her neighborhood. Joan won't be surprised when he 
arrives. 
He gave her the book. We don't know if this was a loan or a gift. 

We draw such conclusions so fluently that we don't even know that we are 
doing it. So let's try to examine how much is involved when one understands 
what happened when Joan heard that sound and picked up that phone. 

First, when Joan looks at her telephone, she sees only a single side 
of it, yet she feels that she's seeing the entire thing, And even before she 
reaches for it, she anticipates how it will fit in her grasp, and how it will 
feel when it contacts her ear, and knows that one speaks into here and 
hears answers from there. She knows that if she dials a number, some other 
phone will ring somewhere else—and il anyone happens to answer it, then 
she and that other person can start to converse. 

All this rapid retrieval of knowledge seems a natural aspect of seeing 
an object—and yet, one has only detected some patches of light! How 
docs such scanty evidence make it seem as though what you are "looking 
at" has been transported right into your mind—where you can move it 
and touch it and turn it around, or even open it up and look inside? The 
answer, of course, is that what you "see" does not come from your vision 
alone, but also comes from how those visual clues lead you to retrieve 
other knowledge. 

However, on the other side, you know so much about such things 
that, surely, your mind would be overwhelmed if you had to "attend" to all 
that knowledge at once. So our next few sections will discuss how brains 
might interconnect fragments of knowledge so that we can often retrieve 
just the items tiiat we need. 

The Concept of a "Pan a logy" 

Douglas Lenat 1998: "If you pluck an isolated sentence from a 
book, it will likely lose some or all of its meaning—i.e., if you 
show it out of context to someone else, they will likely miss some 
or all of its intended significance. Thus, much of the meaning of 
a represented piece of information derives from the context in 
which the information is encoded and decoded. This can be a 


COMMON SENSE

tremendous advantage. To the extent that the two thinking beings 
are sharing a common rich context, they may utilize terse signals 
to communicate complex thoughts." 

Every word, event, idea, or thing can have many different meanings to 
us. When you hear "Charles gave Joan the book, " that might make you 
think of that book as a physical object, or as a possession or possible gift. 
And you could interpret this "giving act" in at least these three different 
realms of thought: 

The Physical Realm: Here "give" refers to the book's motion through 
space, as it moves from Charles's hand to Joans. 


The Social Realm: One might wonder about Charles's motivation. Was 
he just being generous, or was he hoping to ingratiate himself? 


The Dominion Realm: We may infer that Joan is not only holding that 
book, but also has gained permission to use it. 


The Dominion Realm is important because you need tools, supplies, 
and materials to solve most problems or carry out plans—but most objects 
in our civilized world are controlled by persons or organizations that won't 
let you use them without their permission. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

So here we see three meanings for "give"—which each have somewhat 
similar structures. Chapter 8-3 will suggest that in such cases, our brains 
connect analogous items of knowledge from different realms (or different 
points of view) to the same "roles" or "slots" in one larger-scale structure. 


THREE MEANINGS OF "GIVE ' 

This diagram illustrates a type of structure that I will call a "panalogy" 
(for "parallel analogy"). This scheme makes it easy to rapidly switch 
between different Ways to Think about an object, idea, or situation. For 
example, when Joan reaches to grasp and hold that book, she anticipates 
(in the Physical Realm) rhe heft of its weight and predicts that if she weakens 
her grasp, then the book will be likely to fall. Also (in the Dominion 
Realm) she needs to represent whether she owns it or has to give it back. 
Thus, if Charles tells her that the book is a gift, then she can cancel that 
obligation. 

What happens when you interpret a certain event in an inappropriate 
realm of thought? Then often, as soon as you recognize this, you 
switch to a more useful point of view, without any sense of starting over 
again. How could you do this so rapidly? Chapter 8 will argue that this 
could come from your use of panalogies: if you have already linked the 
same symbol to an appropriate set of multiple meanings, then switching 
may take no time at all—if the parts of your brain that work in those 
other realms have already done some processing. This could happen, for 
example, when you switch from thinking of that book as an object to 
regarding it as a possession or as a potential collection of knowledge. 


COMMON SENSE 

More generally, most every concept we entertain has connections to 
several different realms. For example, the girl in this scene about playing 
with blocks is likely to have all these kinds of concerns: 


Physical: What if I pulled out that bottom block? 

Social: Should I help him with his tower or knock it down?2 

Emotional: How would he react to that? 

Mnemonic: Where did I leave the small triangular block? 

Strategic: Can I reach that arch-shaped block from here? 

Visual: Is the long flat block hidden behind that stack? 

Tactile: What would it feel like to grab three blocks at once? 

Architectural: Are there enough extra blocks to make a table? 

Wc again sec how a thing or idea can be viewed as having multiple meanings. 
We sometimes call these "ambiguities" and regard them as defects 
in how we express or communicate. However, when these are linked into 
panalogies, then we can think about them in alternative realms—without 
the need to start over again. 


THK EMOTION MAf-HINK 

Student: Your example of giving a book suggests that we use the 
same techniques to represent transportation in space, for transferring 
an ownership, and for transmitting knowledge to other 
brains. Bur what could have led our minds to treat such different 
ideas in such similar ways? 

It surely is no accident that our language uses the same prefix, "trans," in 
transfer, transport, transmit, translate, transpose, etc.—because that common 
word part, "trans," induces us to make many widely useful analogies.3 
Each of us knows thousands of words, and each time we learn how others 
use one of them, we inherit another panalogy. 

Student: How many different realms can a person use for any particular 
concept or object? How many of them can we handle at 
once? How does one know when its time to switch? To what extent 
do different persons partition their worlds into similar realms? 

More research on semantics will eventually clarity questions like these, but 
the following sections will discuss only a few of the realms in which one 
might think about a telephone. 

Subrealms of the Telephone World 

We've mentioned only a few of the things that every telephone user 
knows. However, to use what you know about telephones, you also need 
to know how to speak, and how to understand some of what you may 
hear. You also need a good deal of knowledge about what people are 
and how they think, so that you can turn their interests toward the subjects 
that you want to discuss. Consider how many different knowledge 
realms we engage to understand the story about Joan's telephone call. 

The Physical Realm: Joan is close to her telephone, but Charles 
must be in some more distant place. 

The Dominion Realm: Both Joan and Charles have telephones, and 
Charles has dominion over that book. But we can't be quite certain 
of which objects they own. 

The Procedural Realm: How does one make a telephone call? We 
could represent this in terms of a script in which certain actions 
are specified, but others require you to improvise. 


COMMON SENSE 

O Find telephone number, 
O Locate the telephone. 
p Pick up phone. Wait for tone. 
p Dial number. Wait for ring. 
pInitialsalutation, e.g„ "Hello." 
O Specific discussion. 
p Terminating salutation. 
p Hang up phone. 


First, you must find the phone and dial a number. Then, once the 
connection has been established, you're supposed to begin with some 
pleasantries. Eventually, you should say why you called—and then depart 
from the typical script. At the end you'll close the conversation by saying 
"good-bye" and "hanging up." Generally, such behavioral scripts begin 
and end with conventional steps, with improvisations in between. Also, 
you'll have to depart from the script if something goes wrong—and know 
how to deal with a wrong connection, or what to do if no one replies, or 
if you hear the whine of a modem, or if there is too much noise on the 
line. 

The Social Realm: When that telephone rings from across the room, 

Joan will have to walk over to get it, she knows it will do no good to ask, 
"Telephone, would you please come here!" To make an inanimate object 
move, you have to push, pull, ot catry it. But if you want a person to 
move, those actions would be considered rude; instead, you're expected 
to make a request. It takes our children quite a few years to learn enough 
such social rules. 

The Economic Realm: Every action incurs some cost-—not only in 
materials, time, and energy, but also by closing off alternatives that might 
bring different benefits. This raises questions about how much effort and 
time one should spend at comparing the costs of those options. 1 suspect 
that there's no simple answer to that, because it depends so much on the 
present state of the rest of one's mind. 

Hie Conversational Language Realm: Most people are experts at 
dialog, but consider how complex arc the skills involved in a typical verbal 
exchange. You must constantly keep track of the topic, your goal, and 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

your social role. To maintain the respect of your listeners, you must guess 
what they already know and remember what has already been said so that 
you won't be too repetitive. It is annoying to be told things one already 
knows, like "People can't see the backs of their heads," so your conversation 
must partly be based on your models of what your listeners know about 
the subjects that are being discussed. 

You can communicate your apprehensions and hopes—or try to 
disguise your intentions; you know that every nuance of expression can 
strengthen or weaken social bonds; each phrase can persuade or intimidate, 
conciliate or irritate, or ingratiate or drive away. You also need to 
keep searching for clues about how well they have understood what you 
have said—and why you were trying to tell them those things. 

Humanist: Speaking over a telephone is a poor substitute for a 
face-to-face exchange. The telephone lacks the "personal touch" 
through which your gestures can put the others at ease, or express 
the strength of your feelings. 

One always loses some nuances when conversing with a person at some 
other location. On the other side, we're not always aware of the misconceptions 
that tcsult from what we call "face-to-lace" interactions. What if 
the stranger whom you have just met should resemble (in manner or facial 
appearance) some trusted friend or some enemy? If that person reminds 
you of some old Imprinter, this can arouse a misplaced affection or unjustified 
sense of intimidation. You may think you can later correct such 
mistakes—but one can never completely erase the "first impression" that 
one makes. 

The Sensory and Motor Realms: We also all share many abilities that 
we don't usually call "commonsensical"—such as the kinds of physical 
skills that Joan uses to answer that telephone call. It takes less than a single 
second for you to reach out your arm and "pick up the phone"—yet consider 
how many subgoals this involves: 

Determine the telephone's location. 

Determine its shape and orientation. 

Plan to move your hand to its place. 

Plan how your hand will grasp its shape. 

Plan to transport it toward your face. 


COMMON SENSE

Each step of that script raises questions about how we do those things 
so quickly. Wc can program computers to do such things, hut we do not 
know how we do them ourselves. It is often supposed that such actions 
are done under continuous "feedback control"—-by processes that keep 
working to reduce your distance from your goal. However, that cannot 
be generally true because human reactions are so slow that it takes about 
one-fifth of a second to react to events that one did not expect. This means 
that you cannot change what you are doing right now; all you can do is revise 
the plan that you've made for what you will do after that. Thus, when Joan 
reaches out to answer diat call, she must plan to reduce the speed of her 
hand before it collides with that telephone. Without good plans for what 
will happen next, she'd be constantly having accidents. 

Kinesthetic, Tactile, and Hap tic Realms: When you squeeze your 
phone between shoulder and cheek, you anticipate its texture and weight, 
adjust your grip so that it won't slip, and expect those pressures to disappear 
as soon as you release it. You already know that this object will fall if 
released from your grasp, or will break when subjected to too large a stress. 
An immense amount of such knowledge is stored in your spinal cord, 
cerebellum, and brain—bur those systems are so inaccessible that we can 
scarcely begin to think about them. 

Cognitive Realms: We are almost equally inept at describing the systems 
we use when we think. For example, we are almost completely unaware 
of how we retrieve and combine the various fragments of knowledge we 
need—or of how we deal with the risks of bei ng wrong when these involve 
uncertainties. 

The Self-Know ledge Realm: Whatever you may be trying to do, you'll 
need models of your own abilities. Otherwise, you'll set goals that you'll 
never achieve, make elaborate plans that you won't carry out, or too frequently 
switch between interests—because, as we'll see in Chapter 9-2, it 
is hard to achieve any difficult goals unless one can make oneself persist 
at them. 

It would be easy to add to this list of realms, but hard to construct 
clear distinctions between them. 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

6-2 Commonsense Knowledge and Reasoning 

Robertson Davies 1992: "You like the mind to be a neat machine 
equipped to work efficiently, if narrowly, and with no extra bits 
or useless parts, I like the mind to be a dustbin of scraps of brilliant 
fabric, odd gems, worthless but fascinating curiosities, tinsel, 
quaint bits of carving, and a reasonable amount of healthy dirt. 
Shake the machine and it goes out of order; shake the dustbin and 
it adjusts itself beautifully to its new position." 

I once encountered a fellow professor who was returning from teaching a 
class, and I asked him how the lecture went. The reply was that it had not 
gone well because "/ couldn't remember which concepts were hard." This suggests 
that, over time, such experts convert some of their high-level skills 
into lower-level scriptlike processes that leave so few traces in memory 
rhat those experts cannot explain how they actually do those things. This 
has led many thinkers to classify knowledge into two kinds: 

Knowing What. This is the kind of "declarative" or "explicit" 
knowledge that we can express in gestures or words. 
Knowing How. These are the kinds oi "procedural" or "tacit" skills 
(like walking or imagining) that we find very hard to describe. 

However, this popular distinction doesn't describe the functions of those 
types of knowledge. It might be better to classify knowledge in terms of 
the kinds of thinking that we can apply to it: 

Positive Expertise. Knowing the situations in which to apply a particular 
fragment of knowledge. 
Negative Expertise. Knowing which actions not to take, because 
they might make a situation worse. 
Debugging Skills. Knowing alternative ways to proceed when our 
usual methods fail. 
Adaptive Skills. Knowing how to adapt old knowledge to new situations. 

The first large-scale attempt to catalog commonsense knowledge was the 
"CYC" project of Douglas Lenat, which started in 1984. Many ideas in 
this section were inspired by the results of that project. 


COMMON SENSE

Douglas Lenat 1998: "In modern America, this encompasses 
recent history and current affairs, everyday physics, 'household' 
chemistry, famous books and movies and songs and ads, famous 
people, nutrition, addition, weather, etc. .. . [It also includes] 
many 'rules of thumb' largely derived from shared experiences-
such as dating, driving, dining, daydreaming, etc.—and human 
cognitive economics (misremembering, misunderstanding, etc.), 
and shared modes of reasoning both high (induction, intuition, 
inspiration, incubation) and low (deductive reasoning, dialectic 
argument, superficial analogy, pigeon-holing, etc.)." 

Then Lenat examines a single sentence: "Fred told the waiter be wanted 

some chips," to see the kinds of knowledge one might require to understand 

what that statement means.4 

The word he means Fred—and not the waiter. This event took 
place in a restaurant. Fred was a customer dining there. Fred and 
the waiter were a few feet apart. The waiter was at work there, 
waiting on Fred at that time. 

Fred wants potato chips, not wood chips. Fred does not want 

some particular set of chips. 

Fred accomplished this by speaking words to the waiter. Both 
Fred and the waiter are live human beings. Both of them speak 
the same language. Both were old enough to talk, and the waiter 
was old enough to work, 

Fred is hungry. He wants and expects that in a few minutes the 
waiter will bring him a typical portion—which Fred will start eating 
soon after he gets them. 

We can also assume that Fred assumes that the waiter also assumes 

all those things. 

Here is another example of what one must know to understand a commonplace 
statement: 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

"Joe's daughter was sick so he called the doctor." 

We can assume that Joe cares about his daughter, is upset because 
she is sick, and wants her to be healthy. Presumably he believes she 
is sick because of observing some symptoms. 

People have different abilities. Joe himself cannot help his daughter. 
People ask others for help to do things they can't do themselves. 
So Joe called the doctor to help heal his daughter. 

Joe's daughter, in some sense, belongs to Joe. People care more 
about their own daughters than about other people's daughters. If 
so advised, Joe will take the daughter to the doctor. When at the 
doctor's, she will still belong to Joe. 

Medical services can be expensive, but joe is likely to forgo other 
spending to get the doctor to help the daughter. 

All these arc things that "everyone knows" and uses to understand everyday 
stories. But none of that knowledge would have much use unless we also 
had additional knowledge about which fragments of knowledge might 
help us to achieve each particular kind of goal. 

How Much Does a Typical Person Know'/ 

"A little knowledge is a dangerous thing. So is a lot." 
—Albert Einstein 


Evetyone knows a good deal about many objects, topics, and ideas—and 
this might lead one to suppose that we each have enormous memories. 
And many writers have argued that, since each human brain has trillions 
of synapses, then surely we must use these to store at least many billions 
of memories. However, if the arguments in this section are right, then our 
bodies of knowledge might not be so vast. 

In any case, let's start by making a minimal estimate. We know each 
person knows thousands of words, and it seems safe to assume that a typical 
word might be linked in our minds to perhaps a thousand other items 
of memory. This means that a person's language system might have the 


COMMON SKNSK 

order of a few million links. Similarly, in the physical realm, we each know 
thousands of kinds of objects—and typically, each might be linked to a 
thousand other objects and uses. Similarly, in the social realm, you might 
know thousands of things about each of a hundred people and hundreds 
of things about each of a thousand people. 

This suggests that in each important realm, one might know perhaps 
a few million things. But while it is easy to think of a dozen such realms, 
it is hard to think of a hundred of them. So all this suggests that, for a 
machine to do humanlike reasoning, this might require only the order of 
a few hundred millions of items of knowledge."5 

Citizen: Perhaps so, but I have heard of phenomenal feats of 
memory. What about persons with photographic memories, who 
can recollect all the words of a book after only a single reading of 
it? Could it be that we all remember, to some extent, everything 
that happens to us? 

We all have heard such anecdotes, but whenever we try to investigate one, 
we usually fail to uncover the source, or find that someone was tooled by 
a magic-show trick. We sometimes encounter a person who has memorized 
the contents of a lew sizable books——but I have heard of no rigorous 
demonstration that someone has memorized a hundred such books/' Here 
is what one psychologist said about a person who appeared to possess a 
prodigious memory: 

Alexander R. Luria 1968: "For almost thirty years [I] had an 
opportunity systematically to observe a man whose remarkable 
memory... for all practical purposes was inexhausrible.... It was 
of no consequence to him whether the series I gave him contained 
meaningful words or nonsense syllables, numbers or sounds; 
whether they were presented orally or in writing. All that he 
required was that there be a three-to-four-second pause between 
each element in the series. . . . And he could manage, also, to 
repeat the performance fifteen years later, from memory." 

This performance may seem remarkable, but might not be truly exceptional, 
because Thomas Landauer (1986) concluded that, during any 
extended interval, none of his subjects could learn at a rate of more than 


THE AMOTION MACWNK 

about two bits per second, whether the realm be visual, verbal, musical, or 
whatever. So if Luria's subject required a lew seconds per word, his performance 
would fit Landauer's estimate.7 

Student: I'm uncomfortable with this argument. I agree that it 
might apply to our higher-level kinds of knowiedge. But our sensory 
and moror skills might be based on much larger amounts of 
information. 

We don't have a good way to measure such things, and making such estimates 
raises hard questions about how those fragments of knowledge are 
stored and connected. Still, we have no solid evidence that any person has 
ever surpassed the limits that Landauer's research suggests.8 

Chapter 7 will speculate about how we organize knowledge so that, 
whenever one of our processes fails, we can usually find an alternative. But 
here we'll change the subject to ask how we could endow a machine with 
the kinds of knowledge that people have. 

Could We Build a "Baby-Machine"? 

Here is an old and popular dream: to build a machine that starts by learning 
in simple ways and then later develops more powerful methods—until 
it becomes intelligent. 

Entrepreneur: Why not build a "baby-machine" that leatns what 
it needs from experience? Equip a robot with sensors and motors, 
and program it so that it can learn by interacting with the real 
world—the way that a human infant does. It could start with simple 
If—*Tben schemes, and then later invent more elaborate ones. 

In fact, several actual projects have had this goal, and each such system 
made progress at first but eventually stopped extending itself.1'1 I suspect 
that this usually happened because those programs failed to develop good 
new ways to represent knowledge. Indeed, inventing good ways to represent 
knowledge has long been a major goal in computer science. However, 
even when new ones arc discovered, they rarely are quickly and widely 
adopted—because one must also develop good skills to work with them 
efficiently. And since such skills take time to grow, their users will need to 
tolerate extensive periods during which their performance becomes not 


COMMOP, SKNSE 

better, but worse.1" (See Section 6-7 and Chapter 9-4.) In any case, no one 
has yet made a baby-machine that was able to keep on developing effective 
new kinds of representations. 

Another problem with baby-machines is that if a system learns new rules 
too recklessly, it is likely to accumulate too much irtelevant information—and 
its performance will deteriorate. Chapter 8-5 will argue that unless learning 
is done selectively—by making appropriate "credit assignments"—a machine 
will fail to learn the right things from most of its experiences. 

Entrepreneur: Instead of trying to build a system that learns by 

itself, why not make one that searches the Web to extract knowl


edge from those millions of pages of content-rich text. 

That certainly is a tempting idea, for the World Wide Web must contain 
more knowledge than any one person ever could learn. However, the texts 
on the Web do not explicitly display the knowledge that one would need to 
understand what all those texts mean." Thus, consider the kind of story 
we find in a typical child's reading book: 

"Mary was invited to Jack's party. She wondered if he would like a 

kite. She went and shook her piggy bank. It made no sound." 

Atypical reader would assume that Jack is having a birthday party, and that 
Mary is concerned about the need to bring a birthday present to Jack.12 A 
good birthday present should be something that its recipient likes—and 
the suggestion that Jack might like a kite also suggests that Jack is a child, 
and that a kite might be a suitable toy. Mentioning a piggy bank suggests 
that Mary is thinking of buying a kite and needs money to pay for it. Also, 
the bank would have rattled if it contained coins; this implies that Mary 
now faces a financial problem. However, unless the reader knows all these 
facts, this "simple" story would make no sense, because there would be no 
apparent connection between each of its sentences and the next. 

Neurologist: Why not try to copy the brain, using what brain scien


tists have learned about the (unctions of various parts of the brain. 

We learn more about such details every week—but still do not yet 
know enough to simulate even a spider or snake. 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Programmer: What about alternatives such as building very large 

machines that accumulate huge libraries of statistical data? 

Such systems can learn to do useful things, but I would expect them to 
never develop much cleverness, because they use numerical ways to represent 
all the knowledge they get. So until we equip them with higher 
reflective levels, they won't be able to represent the concepts they'd need 
for understanding what those numbers might mean. 

Evolutionist: If we don't know how to design better baby-machines, 
perhaps we can make them evolve by themselves. We could first 
write a program that writes other programs and then makes various 
kinds of mutations of them—and then make all those programs 
compete for survival in suitably lifelike environments. 

Ir took hundreds of millions of years for us to evolve from the earliest vertebrate 
fish, and it took all ol those eons for us to develop the structures 
that became the higher reflective levels that we described in Chapter 5. 
The following chapters will argue that each human child makes extensive 
use of those high-level structures to develop our uniquely human ways to 
represent new kinds of knowledge and processes. It seems clear to me that 
this is why the attempts to make baby-machines have led to unimpressive 
results: you cannot learn things that you can't represent. 

John McCarthy 1959: "If one wants a machine to be able to dis


cover an abstraction, it seems most likely that the machine must be 

able to represent this abstraction in some relatively simple way." 

I do not mean to dismiss all prospects of building a baby-machine, but I 
suspect that any such system would develop too slowly unless (or untii) it 
was equipped with adequate ways to represent knowledge (see Chapter 8). 
In any case, it seems fairly clear that human brains are innately equipped 
with highly developed ways to learn (some of which don't start to operate 
until long after birth). The researchers who have tried to build such 
machines have used quite a few ingenious schemes, but it seems to me that 
each of those machines got stuck because ol not having ways to overcome 
one or more problems like these: 


COMMON SENSE 

The Optimization Paradox: The better a system already works, the 
more likely each change will make it worse-—so it gets more difficult 
for it to find more ways to improve itself. 

The Investment Principle: The better a certain process works, the 
more we will tend to rely on it, and the less we will be further 
inclined to develop new alternatives—especially when a new technique 
won't yield good results until you become proficient with it. 

The Complexity Barrier: The more that the parts of a system interact, 
the more likely each change will have unexpected side effects. 

Evolution is often described as a process of selecting beneficial changes— 
but most of evolution's work involves rejecting changes that have bad 
effects! This surely is why most species evolve to occupy narrow, specialized 
niches that are bounded by all sorts of hazards and traps. It is not 
often recognized that while genetic evolution can "learn" to avoid the 
most common kinds of mistakes, it is virtually incapable of learning large 
numbers of very uncommon mistakes. Indeed, only a few "higher animals" 
have escaped from this by evolving language-like systems through 
which they can inform their descendants about accidents that happened 
to some of their ancestors' relatives. 

All this suggests that it will be difficult for a machine to keep developing-—
unless it first evolves ways to protect itself against changes that cause 
bad side effects. An excellent way to accomplish this, both in engineering 
and in biology, has been to split the whole system into parts that then can 
evolve more independently. This surely is why all living things evolved 
to become assemblies of separate parts (which we call "organs")-—each of 
which have comparatively few connections to other parts. 


AN UNSTRUCTURED SYSTEM AN "ORGANIZED" SYSTEM 


 THE EMOTION MACHIM-; 

In an organ-based structure, a change in one organ will have fewer bad 
effects on what happens inside the other organs. In particular, this could 
be why the resources inside our brains evolved to become "organ-ized" into 
mo re-or-less separate centers and levels, 

Alan Turing 1950: '"We cannot expect to find a good child 
machine at the first attempt. One must experiment with teaching 
one such machine and see how well it learns. One can then try 
another and see if it is better or worse [but] survival of the fittest 
is a slow method for measuring advantages. The experimenter, by 
the exercise of intelligence, should be able to speed it up [because] 
if he can trace a cause for some weakness he can probably think of 
the kind of mutation which will improve it." 

Remembering 

Whenever we get a new idea, or find a new way to solve a problem, then 
we may make a memory record ol it. But records are useless unless you 
have ways to "re-collect" the ones that are relevant to the problem that you 
are facing right now. I'll argue that this needs a lot of machinery. 

Citizen: If remembering is so complex, then why does It seem so 
effortless, simple, and natural? Each idea reminds me of similar 
ones, which then make me think of related ideas—until I recall 
the ones that I need. 

Why does "remembering" seem so effortless? As long ago as you can 
remember, you could always recall things that happened to you. However, 
you cannot remember much of your earjiesr years; in particular, you cannot 
recall how you developed your early abilities. Presumably, you had not 
yet developed the skills one needs for making those kinds of memories. 
(See Johnston 1997.) 

Because of this Amnesia of Infancy, we all grow up with simplistic views 
of what memories are and how they work. You might think of your memory 
as like a writing pad, on which you can jot down mental notes. Or perhaps 
for each significant event, you store "it" away in some kind of memory-
box and later, when you want it back, you somehow bring "it" out of that 


COMMON SENSE

box—if you arc lucky enough to find it. But what kinds of structures do we 
use to represent those "its" and how do we bring them back when wc need 
them? Our recollections would be useless unless (1) they were relevant to 
our present goals and (2) we also had ways to retrieve the ones that we need 
at the rimes when we need them. 

To retrieve information rapidly, a computer expert might suggest 
that we store everything in some single "database" and use some general-
purpose "matching" technique. However, most such systems still classify 
things in terms of how those things have been described instead of in terms 
of the goals that they can help us to achieve. This is extremely important 
because we usually know less about the type of thing we are looking for than 
about the goal that we want to accomplish with it—because we're always 
facing some obstacles, and want to know how to deal with them. 

So instead of using some "general" method, 1 suspect that every child 
develops ways to link each new fragment of knowledge to some particular 
goals it might help to achieve, and thus help to answer questions like 
these: 

What kinds of goals might this item serve? Which kinds of problems 

could it help to solve? What obstacles could it help to overcome? 

In which situations might it be relevant? In which contexts is this 

likely to help? What subgoals must first be achieved? 

How has it been applied in the past? What were some similar pre


vious cases? What other records might be relevant? See Credit 

Assignment in Chapter 8-5


Each fragment of knowledge may also need links to some knowledge 
about its deficiencies—and the dangers and costs of using it: 

What are its most likely side effects? Is it likely to do us more harm 

or more good? 

How much will it cost to use it? Will it repay the efforr of using it? 

What are its common exceptions and bugs? In which contexts is it 

likely to fail us—and what might be good alternatives? 

We also link each item to information about its sources and to what certain 
other persons might know. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Was it learned from a reliable source? Some informants may simply 
be wrong, wht'e others may mean to mislead us. 
Is it likely to be outdated soon? That's why this book does not 
discuss most current beliefs about how our brains work. 
Which other people are likely to know it? Our social activities 
strongly depend on knowing what others may understand. 

All this raises questions about how we make so many connections to and 
from each new fragment of knowledge. 1 suspect that we can't do this all 
at once—and indeed there is some evidence that it normally takes some 
hours or days (including some sessions of dream-laden sleep) to establish 
new long-term memories. Also, we probably add more links each time 
we retrieve a fragment of knowledge, because then we're likely to ask ourselves, 
"How did this item help (or hinder) me at overcoming this obstacle?" 
Indeed, some research in recent years suggests that our so-called long-term 
memories are not so permanent as we used to think; it seems that they can 
be altered by suggestions and other experiences. 

We all know that our memory systems can rail. There are things that we 
can't remember at all. And sometimes we tend to recollect not what actually 
happened to us but versions that seem more plausible. At other times we fail 
to remember something relevant until-—after several minutes or days—suddenly 
the answer appears, and you say to yourself, "How stupid of me; I knew 
that all along!" (That could happen eithet because an existing record took 
long to retrieve, or because it was never actually there—and you had to construct 
a new idea by using some process of reasoning.) 

In any case, we should expect such "lapses" because our recollections 
must be selective; Chapter 4-4 discussed how bad it would be to remembet 
everything all the time: it would overwhelm us to recall all the millions of 
things that we know. However, none of this answers the question of how 
we usually retrieve the knowledge that we currently need. I suspect that we 
do this mainly by our already having prepared in advance the sort of links 
discussed above. But constructing these requires additional skills, which 
we'll discuss in Chapter 8-5


At the start of this section we asked about how we retrieve the knowledge 
we need. The following section will argue that part of the answer 
lies in those links to the goals that each fragment of knowledge might help to 
achieve. To make that statement more concrete, the next few sections will 
investigate what goals are and how they work. 


COMMON SENSE

6-3 Intentions and Goals 

Alan Watts ) 960: "No one imagines that a symphony is supposed 
to improve in quality as it goes along, or that the whole object of 
playing it is to reach the finale. The point ol music is discovered in 
every moment of playing and listening to it. It is the same, I feel, 
with the greater part of our lives, and if we are unduly absorbed in 
improving them we may forget altogether to live them." 

Sometimes we seem to act passively, just reacting to things that happen to 
us—but at other times we feel more in control, and feel that we're actively 
choosing our goals. I suspect that this most often happens when two or 
more goals become active at once and thereby lead to a conflict. For as we 
noted in Chapter 4-1, when our routine thinking runs into trouble, this 
engages our higher reflective levels. 

For example, when angry or greedy enough, we are likely to take 
actions that later may make us have feelings of shame or guilt. Then we 
may offer such justifications as, "That impulse became too strong to resist"or 
"Ifound that I did it in spite of myself. " Such excuses relate to the conflicts 
between our immediate goals and our higher ideals, and every society tries 
to teach its members to resist their urges to breach its conventions. We call 
this developing "self-control" (see Chapter 9-2), and each culture makes 
maxims about such feelings. 

Moralist: No merit comes from anions based on self-serving wishes. 

Psychiatrist: One must leatn to control one's unconscious desires. 

Jurist: To be guilty in the first degree, an offense must be deliberate. 

Still, an offender can object, "I didn't intend to do those things"'as though a 
person is not "responsible" for an action that wasn't intentional. But what 
kinds of behavior might lead you to think that a person did something 
"deliberately"—in contrast to it having resulted from mental processes 
that were not under that person's control? 

To understand this, it may help to observe that we have similar thoughts 
about physical things; when we find that some object is hard to control, we 
sometimes imagine that it has a goal—and say, "This puzzle piece doesn't want 
to fit in," oi "My car seems determined not to start." Why would we think of 
an object in that way, when we know that it has no such intentions? 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

The same thing can happen inside your mind, when one of your goals 
becomes so strong that it is hard to think about anything else. Then it 
may seem to come from no choice of your own, yet is somehow being 
imposed upon you.But what could make you pursue a goai that does not 
seem to be one that you want? This could happen when that particular 
goal conflicts with some of your high-level values, or when you have other 
goals with different aims; in any case, there is no reason to expect all of 
your goals to be consistent. 

However, this still does not answer the question of why a goal can seem 
like a physical force, as in, "That urge became irresistible." And indeed, a 
"powerful'1 goal can seem to push other goals aside, and even when you try 
to oppose it, it may prevail if you don't fight back strongly enough. Thus 
both forces and goals share some features like these: 

Both seem to aim in a certain direction. 

Both "push back" when we try to deflect them. 

Each seems to have a "strength" or "intensity." 

Both tend to persist till the cause of them ends. 

For example, suppose that some external force is applied to your arm—say, 
strongly enough to cause some pain—and your^-Brain reacts by pushing 
back (or by moving away)—but, whatever you do, it keeps pressing on 
you. In such a case, your 5-Brain might see nothing more than a sequence 
of separate events. However, your higher reflective levels might recognize 
these as matching this particular pattern: 

"Something is resisting my efforts to make it stop. I recognize this as 

a process that shows some persistence, aim, and resourcefulness." 

Furthermore, you might recognize a similar pattern inside your mind 
when some resources make choices in ways that the rest of your mind cannot 
control, as when you do something "in spite of yourseil." Again, that 
pattern may seem as though some external force was imposed on you. So 
it often makes practical sense to represent intentions as though they were 
like forces or even like antagonists. 

Student: But isn't it merely a metaphor, to speak of a goal as resem


bling a force? Surely it's bad to use the same words for things with 

such different characteristics. 


COMMON SENSE

We should never say "merely" for metaphors, because that is what all 
descriptions are; we can never state just what something is, we can only 
describe what something is like—that is, to describe it in terms of other 
things that seem to us to have some similar properties—-and then to consider 
the differences. Then we label it with the same or a similar name so 
that thenceforth that older word or phrase will include this additional 
meaning-sense. This is why most of our words are "suitcase-words." Chapter 
9-4 will argue that the ambiguities of our words may be the greatest 
treasures that we inherit from our ancestors. 

We've mentioned goals many times in this book—but never discussed 
how goals might work. So let us turn from the subject of how a goal feels 
to ask what a goal might actually be! 

Difference-Engines 

Aristotle a: "Differences arise when what we get is different from 

what we desire; for it is like getting nothing at all when we do not 

get what we aim at." 

Sometimes people appear to behave as though they had no direction or 
aim. At other times they seem to have goals. But what is a goal, and how 
can we have one? If you try to answer such questions in everyday words 
like "a goal is a thing that one wants to achieve," you will find yourself going 
in circles because, then, you must ask what wanting is—and then you 
find that you're trying to describe this in terms of other words like motive, 
desire, purpose, aim, hope, aspire, yearn, and crave. 

More generally, you get caught in this trap whenever you try to describe 
a state of mind in terms of other psycho logy-words, because these never 
lead to talking about the underlying machinery. However, we can break 
out of that with a statement like this: 

A system will seem to have a goal when it persists at applying dif


ferent techniques until the present situation changes into a certain 

other condition. 

This takes us out of the psychological realm by leading us to ask about 
what kind of machinery could do such things. Here is one way such a 
process might work: 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Aim: It begins with a description of a certain possible future situation. 
It also can recognize some differences between the situation 
it now is in and that "certain other condition." 

Resourcefulness: It is also equipped with some methods that may be 
able to reduce those particular kinds of differences. 

Persistence: If this process keeps applying those methods, then, in 
psychological terms, we will perceive it as trying to change what 
it now has into what it "wants." 

Persistence, aim, and resourcefulness! The next few sections will argue that 
this particular triplet of properties could explain the functions of what we 
call "motives" and "goals," by giving us answets to the questions that we 
asked in Chapter 2-2: 

What makes some goals strong and others weak? 
What ate the feelings that accompany them? 
What could make an impulse "too strong to resist"? 
What makes certain goals "active" now? 
What determines how long they'll persist? 


No machine had clearly displayed those thtee traits of aim, persistence, and 
resourcefulness—until 1957, when Allen Newell, Clifford Shaw, and Herbert 
Simon developed a computet program called the "General Problem 
Solver," Hete is a simplified version of how it worked; we'll call this version 
a "Difference-Engine"^ 


A "DiFFiiHENCE ENGINE" 

At every step, this process compares itsdesctiptionsof the present and 
that future situation, and this produces a list of differences between them. 
Then it focuses on the most serious difference and applies some technique 


COMMON SENSE

that has been designed to reduce this particular type of difference. If this 
succeeds, the program then tries to reduce what now seems to be the most 
serious difference. However, whenever such a step makes things worse, the 
system goes back and tries a different technique. 

Thus, as we mentioned in Chapter 2-2, every infant is born with two 
systems for maintaining "normai" body temperature: when too hot, the 
baby may sweat, pant, stretch out, and/or vasodilate. 

Instinctive (Actions) Deliberate 

(temperature) 

find shade 
find cool place 

WAYS TO REACT TO BEING Too H OT 

However, when the baby is too cold, it will curl up, shiver, vasoconstrict 
and/or raise its metabolic rate. 

Instinctive (Actions) Deliberate 


shiver —-— add clothing 
curl up turn on heater 

Current —* 

(temperature) 

burn calories —find sunlight 

Normal —» 

vasocanstrict -- brisk exercise 

WAYS TO REACT TO BKINC TOO COLD 

At first we may be unaware of such processes, because such instinctive 
reactions begin at very low cognitive levels. For example, when you 
become too hot, you automatically start to sweat. However, when perspiration 
drips, you may notice tins, and deliberate: "I must find some way to 
escape from this heat" Then your acquired knowledge may suggest other 
actions to take, such as moving to an air-conditioned place. If you feel 
too cold, you might put on a sweater, turn on a stove, or begin to exercise 
(which can make you produce ten times as much heat). Now we can 
interpret "having a goal" to mean that a Difference-Engine is actively 
working to remove those differences. 

Current —i reduce clothing 
find breeze 
Normal —« 

THK AMOTION MACHINi; 

Student: To have a goal, does one really need a representation of 
the desired situation? Would it not be sufficient just to have a list 
of desired properties? 

This is a matter of degree, because one could never specify every aspect 
of a situation. We could represent a "desired situation" as a simple, rough 
sketch of a future scene, as a list of a few of its properties, or as just some 
single property (for example, that it is causing some pain). 

Student: But still, should we not distinguish between merely "having 
a goal" and more actively "wanting" it? I would say tJiat your 
DifFe re nee-Engine is a "wanting-machine" and that the goal itself 
is only the part that you called its "aim"—its current description 
of some future situation. 

I agree that this student is perfectly right: the word goal has two different 
meanings in everyday language. A potential goal becomes an active goal 
when one is running a process that changes things till they fit that description—
and perhaps our everyday language does not help to make the 
distinctions we need; this is why each specialized field needs to develop its 
own special "jargon." But I don't think we'll have any trouble, here, about 
what we mean by "goal" in each context. 

Romanticist: This Difference-Engine idea could account for some 
of what "having a goal" might mean—-but it doesn't explain the 
joy of success, or the distress that we feel when we fail to achieve 
what we've hoped for, 

I agree that no single meaning of goal can explain all of those cascades of 
feelings, because wanting is such a large suitcase of concepts that no single 
idea can embrace them all. Besides, many things that people do come 
from processes with no goals at all, or goals of which they are unaware. 
Nevertheless, the Difference-Engine's characteristics capture more of our 
everyday concept of goal than any other description I've seen. 

Student: What happens when that Difference-Engine finds several 
differences at once? Can it work on them all simultaneously, 
or must it deal with them one by one? 


COMMON SENSE 

The inventors of the General Problem Solver concluded that, when several 
differences are detected, the machine should first try to remove the most 
significant difference because this is likely to make a large change in the 
situation (hence, it might be a waste of time first to remove any smaller 
differences). To do this, General Problem Solver had to assign different 
priorities to each kind of difference that it could detect. 

Student: What if reducing one of those differences makes several 

other differences worse? This could happen if Carol moves a block 

to a place that prevents her from building the rest of her arch. 

When any action makes the largest difference worse, then one may need to 
search several steps ahead—for example, by using the methods described 
in Chapter 5-3. However, without such machinery for making plans, a 
Difference-Engine by itself cannot get past a shorr-term loss ro achieve a 
larger future gain. 

Apparently, this limitation led Newell and Simon to move in other 
research directions, as seen in Newell 1972. I think they should have 
persisted, by adding more reflective levels to the basic Difference-Engine 
scheme—because one could argue that the system got stuck because it 
was not equipped with ways to reflect on its own performance, the way 
that people can "stop to think" about the methods that they have been 
using. Indeed, in a brilliant but rarely cited essay, Newell, Shaw and 
Simon 1960b themselves suggested an ingenious way to make one Difference-
Engine reflect on (and improve) the performance of a second one. 
However, it seems that no researchers (including them) ever went on to 
further develop that scheme. 

What if one fails to solve a problem, even after using reflection and 
planning? Then one may start to consider that this goal may not be worth 
the effort it needs—and this kind of frustration then can lead one to "selfconsciously" 
think about which goals one "really" wants to achieve. Of 
course, if one elevates that level of thought too much, then one might start 
ro ask questions like, "Why should I have any goals at all, "or, "What purpose 
does having a purpose serve"—the troublesome kinds of questions that our 
so-called "existentialists" could never find plausible answers to. 

However, the obvious answer is that this is nor a matter of personal 
choice: we have goals because that's how our brains evolved: the people 
without goals became extinct because they simply could not compete.14 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Goals and Subgoals 

Aristotle a: "Wc deliberate not about ends, but about means. . . , 
We assume the end and think about by what means we can attain 
it. If it can be produced by several means, we consider which one 
of them would be best... [and then] we considet by which means 
that one can be achieved, until we come to the first cause (which 
we will discover last)."1'' 

Chapter 2-2 considered some questions about how we connect our sub-
goals to goals—but did not stop to investigate how those subgoals might 
originate. However, a Difference-Engine does this by itself, because every 
difference it needs to reduce becomes another subgoal for it! For example, 
if Joan is in Boston today, but wants to present a proposal in New York 
tomorrow, then she will have to reduce these differences: 

The meeting is two hundred miles away. 
Her presentation is not yet complete. 
She must pay for transportation, etc. 


That distance difference is too large to walk, but Joan could dtive a car or 
travel by train—and she also knows some "scripts" for taking an airplane 
trip like this. 


Get to the airport. 
Buy ticket, go to the gate. 

Wait on long security line. 

Board the plane. 
Fly to destination airport. 

Local travel to final destination. 

SCRIPT FOR AN AIRPLAMI-, TRIP 

However, each phase of this script needs several steps. She could "Get 
to the alrporf by bicycle, taxicab, or bus, but she decides to drive her 
car—which itself has a script that has subgoals like these. 


COMMON SENSE 


Leave home. Lock the door. 
Walk to driver's side of car. 
Use a key to unlock the door. 
Enter, sit down, close door. 
Fasten seat belt, check fuel. 
Look ahead. Start the car. 

SCRIPT FOR STARTING A TRIP RY CAR 

When Joan reviews that airplane trip, she decides it would waste too 
much of her time ro park the car and pass through the security line. The 
actual flight from her home to New York takes no more than an hour or 
so, and the railroad trip is four hours long, but it ends near her destination—
and she could spend all that time at productive work. She "changes 
her mind" to take the train. 

Similarly, if Carol were to decide to build a tower with her blocks, she 
would need to divide that job into parts and to make a plan that uses a 
procedure like this. 


PROCESS FOR BUILDIM; A TOWER 

Then each of those subgoals will turn out to require several more parts 
and processes—and when we developed a robot to do such things, its 
software needed several hundred parts. For example, "Adda black"needed 
a branching netwotk of subgoals like this. 



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Of course, each subgoal itself may be quite complex. ''Choose a block" 
must avoid selecting blocks that already support the tower top. "See"must 
recognize objects regardless of color, size, and shades of light—and even 
when they arc partly obscured by other blocks. "Grasp" must adapt the 
robot's hand to the size and shape of the block to be moved. And "Move" 
must guide the arm and hand through paths that do not strike the tower's 
top or the child's face. 

How does a person discover which subgoals are required to accomplish 
a job? You could find these by trial and error, or by doing experimenrs in 
your head, or by recalling some prior experience-—and one of the most 
useful methods of all is to use a Difference-Engine, because each difference 
becomes a new subgoal for you. 

To summarize, our idea is that to have an active goal amounts to running 
a Difference-Engine-like process. I suspect tiiat, inside each human 
brain, many such processes all run at once, at various levels in various 
realms. These range from reactive systems that work all the time (like those 
that maintain our temperatures) up to the self-conscious levels at which we 
less frequendy think about what kind of person we'd like to be.Kl 

How often do people actually use the kinds of techniques that we've 
been describing-—such as forming elaborate plans and splitting up jobs 
into smaller ones? In fact, we do most things in much simpler ways, 
because we already know what to do: when you do something a number 
of times (as when you "practice" a new type of skill), it gradually gets 
converted into a script or sequence of actions that less often require higher 
levels of thinking. 

"An expert is one who does not have to think. He knows." 
—Frank Lloyd Wright 


The result is that we need those search-and-planning techniques only 
when we face a new kind of problem (or fail to recognize it as a familiar 
one). But how might "practice" improve a skill, to produce those "expert" 
performances? An ancient theory of this was the idea that each time you 
use a "path in the brain," it deepens some sort of memory groove, so that 
it will be easier to follow that path in the future. A more modern version 
of this is that the synapses between the cells of the brain become better 
conductors when they are more used—and rhere surely must be some 
truth to this. 


COMMON SENSE 

However, Chapter 8 of this book will suggest some higher-level ways 
in which "practice" could improve a performance. For example, some processes 
might replace an extensive search by a straightforward script that 
contains only the steps that led to success; in other words, one learns to 
use a particular path instead of searching through a map. Other processes 
use repeated attempts to replace the Ifs of complex rules by ones that react 
only to relevant features. And yet other processes may construct new Critics 
and Censors to prevent various sorts of common mistakes. 

In any case, as one increases one's proficiency, one may come to feel a 
sense of mastery, as though one understands an entire complex realm, and 
can think of it as a single whole. But this can be an illusion that comes 
from forgetting the effort of learning ones skills and then turning them 
into efficient but mindless scripts—in short, by replacing the process of 
"figuring out" by an unreflective reaction-machine. When this happens, it 
could be one reason why many achievers become less able to teach others 
to imitate their techniques, 

6-4 A World of Differences 

Francis Bacon 1620: "Some minds are stronger and more apt to 
mark the differences of things, others to mark their resemblances. 
The steady and acute mind can fix its contemplations and dwell 
and fasten on the subtlesi distinctions: the lofty and discursive 
mind recognizes and puts together the finest and most general 
resemblances. Both kinds however easily err in excess, by carching 
the one at gradations, the other at shadows," 

Whenever somebody tells you a story, you react less to what each separate 
senrence means than to how this differs from what you expected—and 
this also applies to our other perceptions. For example, if you plunge your 
hand into a bowl of cold water, you'll feel a severe sensation of chill—but 
soon this will totally disappear, just as a steady pressure on your skin will 
quickly seem to diminish in strength. It is the same with new odors or 
tastes, or with the onsets of continuous sounds: at first those sensations 
may seem intense, but then they rapidly fade away. We have many different 
names for this, like accommodation, adaptation, acclimatization, 
habituation, or just becoming accustomed to things. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Student: This doesn't apply to vision, though. I can look at an 

object as long as I like, and its image never fades; in fact, 1 keep 

seeing more features of it. 

Physiologist: In fact, that image would rapidly fade if you could 

keep from moving your eyes, which normally make smalt motions 

that keep changing your retinal images.17 

Thus, most of our external sensors react only to rather rapid changes in 
conditions. (However, we also have additional sensors that do not fade 
away, but keep responding to certain particular harmful conditions.) 

Now let's apply tiie same idea—of a system that "mainly reacts to 
change"—to a brain with a tower of cognitive levels. This could help to 
explain some phenomena. For example, after you start a trip on a train, 
you're aware of the clacking of wheels on the track, but (if that clacking 
is regular) then you will soon stop noticing this. Perhaps your v4-Brain is 
still processing it, but your 5-Brain has stopped reacting to it. It will be 
much the same for the visual scenes; when the train enters a forest, you'll 
start seeing trees—but soon you'll start to ignore them. What could cause 
such meanings to fade? 

Its much the same with repeated words; if someone says "rabbit" one 
hundred times, while trying to focus on what that word means, then that 
meaning will shortly disappear—or be replaced by some other one. And 
similarly the same thing happens when you listen to popular music: first 
you'll hear dozens of nearly identical measures, but the details of these 
soon fade away and you no longer pay any attention to them. Why don't 
we object to that repetitiousness? 

This could be partly because wc tend to interpret such "narratives" in 
terms of how situations change on successively larger scales of time. In the 
case of most music, this structure is clear: we begin by grouping separate 
notes into "measures" of equal length, and we then group these into larger 
sections, until the whole composition is seen as a storylike structure,"4 
We do this in vision and language, too—although with less repetitiousness—
by grouping collections of smaller events into multiple levels of 
events, incidents, episodes, sections, and plots. However, we see this most 
clearly in musical forms: 

"Feature-Detectors" recognize pauses, notes, and various other 
aspects of sounds, such as harmony, tempo, and timbre, etc. 


COMMON SENSE 

"Measure-Takers"group these into chunks. In music, composers 
make this easy for us by using measures of equal length; this 
helps us to sense the differences berween successive chunks. 

"Phrase- and Theme-Detectors" then represent larger events and 
relationships such as, "This theme goes down and then goes up, 
and ends with three short, separate notes. " 

Then "Section-Builders"group these into larger-scale parts, such as, 
"These three similar episodes form a sequence that rises in pitch''" 


Finally, our "Storytellers" interpret each piece as similar to events in 
other realms—such as depicting a journey through space and time, or a 
skirmish among personalities. One special appeal of music is how effectively 
it can depict what we might call "abstract emotional scripts"—stories 
that seem to be about entities about whom we know nothing at all except 
that we can recognize their individual characteristics—e.g., this one is 
warm and affectionate, whereas that one is cold and insensitive. Then we 
empathize with how they feel by interpreting those phrases and themes 
as representing mental conditions like conflict, adventure, surprise, and 
dismay—as in, Those horns are attacking the clarinets, but the strings are 
now trying to calm them down. 

Now suppose that each higher level in the brain mainly reacts to the 
changes below it, but over some larger scale of time. If so, then when 
signals repeat at level A, the S-Brain will have nothing to say. And if the 
signals that go up to B form a sequence that repeats—so that the B-Brain 
keeps seeing a similar pattern—then the C-Brain will sense a "constant condition," 
and thus have nothing to say to the level above it. More generally, 


THE EMCH10N MACHINE 

we can expect any repetitive signal to tend to partly "anesthetize" the next 
level above it. So although your foot may continue to tap to the beat of 
a rhythmic tune, most details of those smaller events eventually will get 
ignored. 

Why might our brains have evolved to work this way? If some condition 
has been present for long—and nothing bad has happened to 
you—then it probably poses no danger to you, so you might as well not 
pay attention to it and apply your resources more gainfully. 

However, this could also lead to other effects. Once a level gets freed 
from control by repetitive signals that come from below it, then it could 
start to "send signals down" to instruct those lower levels to try to detect 
other, different kinds of evidence. For example, during your railroad trip, 
perhaps you first heard those clacks on the tracks as forming a pattern of 
clack-clack-clack-clacks—that is, of beats in 4:4 time. Then you stopped 
hearing them at all—but then you may have suddenly switched to hearing 
groups of clack-clack-clacks—that is, of beats in 3:4 time. What made 
you change your representation? Perhaps some higher level just switched 
to forming a different hypothesis. 

Also, when repetitive signals anesthetize some parts of your brain, this 
could release some other resources to think in new, unusual ways. This 
could be why some types of meditation can thrive on repetitive mantras 
and chants. It also could contribute to what makes some music so popular: 
by depriving the listener of some usual inputs, that repetitiousness 
could free higher-level systems to pursue their own ideas. Then, as suggested 
in Chapter 5-8, they could send down some "simuli" to make some 
lower-level resources simulate imaginary fantasies. 

Rhythmic and Musical Differences 

"Music can move us through brief emotional states, and this can 
potentially teach us how to manage our reelings by giving us familiarity 
to transitions between the states that we know and thus gain 
greater confidence in handling them," 

—Matthew McCauley 

Music (or art, or rhetoric) can divert you from your mundane concerns by 
evoking powerful feelings that range from deiight and pleasure to sorrow 
and pain; these can excite your ambitions and stir you to act, or calm you 
down and make you relax, or even put you into a trance. To do this, those 


COMMON SENSE 

signals must suppress or enhance various sets of mental resources—but 
why should those kinds of stimuli have such effects on your feeling and 
thinking? 

We all know that certain temporal patterns can lead to specific mental 
states; a jerky motion or crashing sound arouses a sense of panic and 
fear—whereas a smoothly changing phrase or touch induces affection 
or peacefulness.20 Some such reactions could be wired from birth—for 
example, to facilitate relationships between infants and parents. For then, 
each party will have some control over what the other one feeis, thinks, 
and does. 

Subsequently, as we grow up, we each learn similar ways to control 
ourselves! We can do this by listening to music and songs, or by exploiting 
other external things, such as drugs, entertainment, or changes of scene. 
Then we also discover techniques for affecting our mental states "from 
inside"—for example, by "hearing" that music inside our minds. (This 
can have a negative side, as when people complain that they can't get certain 
tunes out of their heads.) 

Eventually, lor each of us, certain sights and sounds come to have 
more definite significances—as when bugles and drums depict battles and 
guns. However, we usually each have different ideas about what each fragment 
of music means—particularly when it reminds us of how we felt 
during some prior experience. This has led some thinkers to believe that 
music expresses those feelings themselves; however, most such effects are 
much less direct: 

G. Spencer Brown 1972: "[In musical works] the composer does 
not even attempt to describe the set of feelings occasioned through 
them, but writes down a set of commands which, if they are 
obeyed by the reader, can result in a reproduction, to the reader, 
of the composer's original experience." 
Perhaps Felix Mendelssohn had something like this in mind when he said, 
"The meaning of music lies not in the fact that it is too vague for words, 
but that it is too precise for words," However, some orher thinkers would 
disagree, as noted earlier: 

Marcel Proust 1927: "Each reader reads only what is already inside 
himself. A book is only a sort of optical instrument which the 


THE EMOTION MACHINF 

writer offers to let the reader discover in himself what he would 

not have found without the aid of the book." 

All of this raises questions that people seem strangely reluctant to ask, such 
as, "Why do so many people like music so much, and permit it to take up so 
much of their lives."2] In particular, we ought to ask why nursery rhymes 
and lullabies occur in so many cultures and societies. In Music, Mind, and 
Meaning (Minsky 1981) I suggested some possible reasons (or this: perhaps 
we use those tidy structures of notes and tunes as simplified "virtual'' worlds 
for refining Difference-Detectors that we can then use for condensing more 
complex events (in other realms) into more orderly storylike scripts. 

Difference-Networks 

Whenever you want to accomplish some goal, you will need to retrieve 
some knowledge about some actions or objects that might help. But 
what should you do when what you have does not exactly match what 
you need? Then you'll want to find some substitute that is different— 
but not too dissimilar. For example, suppose that you want to sit down, 
so you look for a chair, but none is in sight. However, if there were a 
bench in view, then you might regard it as suitable. What leads you to 
see the bench as similar when you would not so regard a book or a lamp? 
What makes us selectively notice things that are likely to be relevant? 
Patrick Winston (1970) suggested doing this by organizing some bodies 
of knowledge inro what he called "Difference-Networks"—for example, 
these relations among types of furniture. 



COMMON SENSE

To use such a structure, one first must have some descriptions of the 
objects it represents. Thus, a typical concept of a chair might involve four 
legs, a level seat, and a vertical back, in which the legs must support the 
seat from below at a proper height above the floor—whereas a bench is 
similar (except for being wider and not having a back. 


Now, when you look for a thing that matches your description of 
"chair," your furniture network could recognize a bench as similar. Then 
you can choose to accept that bench, or reject it because it is too wide or 
has no back. 

How might wc accumulate useful sets of Difference-Links*. One way 
would be that, whenever we find an A that "almost works" (that is, for our 
present purposes) along with a B that actually works, we connect the two 
with a Difference-1.ink that represents, "A is tike B, except for a difference 
D." Then such networks could also embody the knowledge we need to 
change what we have into what we need—as well as to suggest alternative 
views whenever the present one fails. Thus, such Difference-Networks 
could help us to retrieve memories that are relevant. 

Most traditional programs were designed to use more hierarchical 
schemes—such as regarding a chair as an instance of "furniture," and a 
table as just another instance. Such hierarchical clas si hear ions often help 
to find suitably similar things, but cannot make enough kinds of distinctions. 
I suspect that people use both techniques but that the "sideways" 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

connections in our Di fife re nee- Networks are more vital to how we construct 
the analogies tliat are among our most useful ways to think about 
things. 

6-5 Making Decisions 

"This river which hid itself doubtless emerged again at some distant 
spot. Why should I not build a raft and trust myself to its 
swiftly flowing waters? If I perished, I should be no worse off than 
now, for death stared me in the face, while there was always the 
possibility that .. . I might find myself safe and sound in some 
desirable land. I decided at any rate to risk it." 

—The Arabian Nights22 

It is easy to choose among options when one appears better than all of the 
rest. But when you find things hard to compare, then you may have to 
deliberate. One way to do this would be to imagine how one might react 
to each possible outcome, and then, somehow, to compare those reactions, 
and then to select the one that seems best. 

"Sensitive imagination is found in every animal, but deliberative 
imagination only in those that can calculate: lor whether this or 
that shall be enacted is already a task requiring calculation." 

—Aristotle, in On the Soul 

One way a petson could "calculate" would be to assign a numetical score 
to each choice, and then to select the largest one. 

Citizen: Lately, I have been trying to choose between a country 
home and an apartment in town. The first one offers more spacious 
rooms and looks out on a beautiful mountain view. The 
other is closer to where I work, is in a friendlier neighborhood, 
but has a highet annual cost. But how could one measure, or even 
compare, situations that differ in so many ways? 

It would be convenient if everyone could agree on the relative values 
of all our things. However, we each have different sets of goals and, 
frequently, those goals will conflict. Still, you could try to imagine how 


COMMON SENSE 

each of those situations would help or hinder you to accomplish your 
various goals. 

Citizen: That might just make the problem worse, because then 
you have to measure your feelings about the values of those various 
goals. 

Benjamin Franklin 1772: "When these difficult cases occur, they 
are difficult chiefly because while we have them under consideration 
all the reasons pro and con are not present to the mind at 
the same time; but sometimes one set present themselves and at 
other times another, the first being out of sight. Hence the various 
purposes or inclinations that alternatively prevail, and the uncertainty 
that perplexes us." 

However, Franklin went on to suggest a way to eliminate much of that 
measuring: 

"To get over this, my way is, to divide half a sheet of paper by a line 
into two columns, writing over the one pro, and over the other 
con. Then during three or four days consideration I put down 
under the different heads short hints of the different motives that 
at different times occur to me for or against the measure. When 
I have thus got them all together in one view, I endeavor to estimate 
their respective weights; and where I find two, one on each 
side, that seem equal I strike them out: if I find a reason pro equal 
to some two reasons con, I strike out the three. If I judge some 
two reasons con equal to some three reasons pro I strike out the 
five; and thus proceeding i find at length where the balance lies; 
and if after a day or two of further consideration nothing new 
of importance occurs on either side, I come to a determination 
accordingly. And tho' the weight of reasons cannot be taken with 
the precision of algebraic quantities, yet when each is considered 
separately and comparatively and the whole lies before me, I think 
1 can judge better, and am less likely to take a rash step; and in fact 
I have found great advantage from this kind of equation, in what 
might be called 'Moral' or 'Prudential Algebra.*" 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Of course, if such a process were to conclude that several options seem 
equally good, then you would have to switch to another technique. You 
sometimes do this reflectively, but at other times the rest of your mind does 
this without your knowing how the decision was made. At such times yon 
may say things like, "I used my 'gut feelings'"'or "I used 'intuition,'" or you 
may claim that you did that "instinctively. " 

PaulThagard 2001: "Many persons trust their gut feelings' more. 
. . . You may have a strongly positive gut feeling toward the more 
interesting subject along with a strongly negative feeling about 
the more career-oriented one, or your feelings may be just the 
opposite. More likely is that you feel positive feelings toward both 
alternatives, along with accompanying anxiety caused by your 
inability to see a clearly preferable option. In the end, intuitive 
decision makers choose an option based on what their emotional 
reactions tell them is preferable."23 

However, using the word emotional does not help us to see what is happening—
because how "positive" or "negative" a feeling seems will still 
depend on how one's mental processes deal with "all the reasons pro and 
con" that Franklin addressed in that letter. Indeed, we frequently have the 
experience that, shortly after we make a decision, we find that it "just does 
not feel right"-—and go back to reconsidering. 

Citizen: Even when options seem equally good, I still can decide. 
How could your kind of theory explain our peculiarly human 
"freedom of choice"? 

It seems to me that when people say, "/ used my free will to make that 
decision," this is roughly the same as saying, "someprocess stopped my deliberations 
and made me adopt what seemed best at that moment. " In other 
words, "free will" is not a process we use to make a decision, but one that 
we use to stop other processes! We may think of it in positive terms, but 
perhaps it also serves to suppress the sense that we are being forced to 
make a choice—if not by pressures from outside, then by causes that come 
from inside our own minds. To say that "My decision was free" is almost the 
same thing as to say, "I don't want to know what decided me,"24 


COMMON SENSE

6-6 Reasoning by Analogy 

"If 1 had eight hours to chop down a tree, I'd spend six sharpening 
my axe." 
—Abraham Lincoln 

The best way to solve a problem is to already know a solution for it—and 
this is why commonsense knowledge is useful. But what if the problem is 
one you have never seen before? How can you continue to work when you 
lack some of the knowledge you need? The obvious answer: you just have 
to guess—nut how does one know how to make a good guess? We usually 
do this SO fluently that we have almost no sense of how we are doing it, 
and, if someone asks about that, we tend to attribute it to mysterious traits 
with names like intuition, insight, creativity, or intelligence. 

More generally, whenever anything attracts your attention—be it an 
object, idea, or a problem—-you are likely to ask yourself what that thing 
is, why is it there, and whether it should be a cause for alarm. But as we 
said in Section 6-3, we can't usually say what anything is- we can only 
describe what something is like, and then start to think about questions 
like these: 

What sorts of things is this similar to? 
Have I seen anything like it before? 
What else does k remind me of? 


This kind of thinking is important because it helps us to deal with new 
situations—and in fact, that is almost always the case, because no two 
situations are ever the same, and this means that we're always making 
analogies. For example, if the problem that you are facing now reminds 
you of one that you solved in the past, then you may be able to use that 
knowledge to solve your problem by using a procedure like this: 

The problem that 1 am working on reminds me of a similar one that 
I solved in the past, but the method that was successful then does not 
quite work on the problem that I am facing now. However, if I can 
describe the differences between that old problem and this new one, 
those differences might help me to change that old method so that it 
will work for me now. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

We call this "reasoning by analogy" and I'll argue that this is our most 
usual way to deal with problems. We do this because, in general, old 
methods rarely work perfectly, as new situations are never quite the same. 
So instead, we use analogies. But why do analogies work so well? Here is 
the best way I've seen to explain why this is: 

Douglas Lenat 1997: "Analogy works because there is a lot of 
common causality in the world, common causes which lead to an 
overlap between two systems, between two phenomena or whatever. 
We, as human beings, can only observe a tiny bit of that 
overlap; a tiny bit of what is going on at this level of the wotld. . . . 
[So] whenever we find an overlap at this level, it is worth seeing 
if in fact there are additional overlap features, even though we do 
not understand the cause or causality behind it. 

So now let's inspect an example of this. 

A Geometric Analogy Program 

Everyone has heard about great improvements in computer speed and 
capacity, Ir is not so widely known that, in other respects, computers have 
not really changed very much in their basic capabilities. Designed originally 
for doing high-speed arithmetic, it was usually assumed that this was 
all computers would ever accomplish—which is why they were misnamed 
"computers." 

However, people soon began to write programs to deal with non-
numerical things such as linguistic expressions, graphical pictures, and 
various forms of reasoning. Also, instead of following rigid procedures, 
some of those programs were designed to search through wide ranges of 
different attempts—so that they could solve some problems by trial and 
error, instead of by using pre-programmed steps. Some of these early non-
numerical programs became masters at solving some puzzles and games, 
and some were quite proficient at designing new kinds of devices and 
circuits." 

Yet despite those impressive performances, it was clear that each of 
these early "expert" problem-solving programs could operate only in some 
natrow domain. Many observers concluded that this came from some 
limitation of the computer itself. They said that computers could solve 


COMMON SENSE 

only "well-defined problems" and would never be able to cope with ambiguities, 
or to use the kinds of analogies that make human thinking so 
versatile. 

To make an analogy between two things is to find ways in which they 
are similar—but when and how do we see two things as similar? Let's 
assume that they shate some common features but also have some differences. 
Then how similar they may seem to be will depend upon which 
differences one decides to ignore. But the importance of each difference 
depends upon ones current intentions and goals. For example, one's concern 
with the shape, size, weight, or cost of a thing depends on what one 
plans to use it for—-so, the kinds ol analogies that people will use must 
depend upon their current purposes. But before the Difference-Engine 
idea was conceived, few people believed that machines could ever have 
goals or purposes. 

Citizen: But if your theory of how people think depends on using 
analogies, how could any machine do such things? People have 
always told me that machines can only do logical things, or solve 
problems that are precisely defined—so they cannot deal with 
hazy analogies. 

To refute such beliefs, Thomas G. Evans (1963) wrote a program that 
performed surprisingly well in what many people would agree to be 
ambiguous, ill-defined situations. Specifically, it answered the kinds of 
questions in a widely used "intelligence test" that asked about "geometric 
analogies." For example, a person was shown the picture below and asked 
to choose an answer to: "A is to B as C is to which of the other five figures?" 
Most older persons choose figure 3-—and so did Evans's program, whose 
score on such tests was about the same as that of a typical sixteen-yearold. 




THK EMOTION MACHINE 

In those days, many thinkers found it hard to imagine how any computer 
could solve such problems, because they felt that choosing an answer 
must come from some "intuitive" sense thar could not be embodied in 
logical rules. Nevertheless, Evans found a way to convert this to a far less 
mysterious kind of problem. We cannot describe here all the details of his 
program, so we will show only how its methods resemble what people do 
in such situations. For if you ask someone why they chose figure 3, they 
usually give an answer like this: 

You can change A to B by moving the big circle down, and you 

can change C to 3 by moving the big triangle. 

This statement expects the listener to understand that both clauses describe 
something in common-—even though there is no big circle in figure 3. 
However, a more articulate person might say: 

You can change A to B by moving the largest figure down, and 

you can change C to 3 by moving the largest figure down. 

Now those two clauses are identical—and this suggests that one could 
use a three-step process based on these kinds of descriptions. First, invent 
descriptions for each of top row of figures. For example, these might be 

Figure A shows high large, high small, and low small objects. 

Figure B shows low large, high small, and low small objects. 

Figure C shows high large, high small, and law small objects. 

Next, invent an explanation for how A might have been changed to B. For 
example, this might simply be: 

Change "high large" to "low large." 

Finally, use this to change the description of figure C. The result will be 

Figure Cshows low large, high small, and low small objects. 

If this prediction—of how figure C has been changed—matches one of the 
possible answers more closely than any other one, that's what we'll choose 


COMMON SENSE 

for our answer! In fact, it matches only figure 3—which is the one that most 
people select. (If it matches two or more figures, Evans's program starts over 
again by making different descriptions of the same pictures.) The program 
performed as well on such rests as did typical fifteen-year-olds. 

Of course, whenever we need to make a choice, the differences that 
will concern us most will depend on our goals. If Carol wants merely to 
build an arch, then all of the forms in the figure below may seem adequate-—
but if she plans to put more objects on top of her arch, then the 
one on the right will be less suitable. 

Although these particular "geometric analogy" problems are not very 
common in everyday life, Evans's program shows the value of being able 
to change our descriprions until we find ways to describe different things 
so that they seem more similar. This often enables us to use our knowledge 
about one kind of thing to understand some other, different kind 
of thing-—and discovering new ways to look at things is one of our most 
powerful commonsense processes. 

George P6lya 1954: "We can learn the use of such fundamental 
mental operations as generalization, specialization, and the 
perception of analogies. There is perhaps no discovery, either in 
elementary or in an advanced mathematics, or, for that matter, in 
any other subject, that could do without these operations, especially 
without analogy." 

Notice that to make and use an analogy, one must work on three different 
levels at once: (1) descriptions of the original objects, (2) descriptions of their 
relationships, and (3) descriptions of the differences between those relationships. 
Of course, as we saw in Chapter 5-2 and 5-3, none of these descriptions 
should be too concrete (or they won't apply to other examples), and none 
of them should too abstract (or they won't be able to represent the differences 
that are relevant).26 


THE KM 01 ION MACHINE 

6-7 Positive vs. Negative Expertise 

"Never interrupt your enemy when he is making a mistake." 

—Napoleon Bonaparte 

"i have learned throughout my life as a composer chiefly through 
my mistakes and pursuits of false assumptions, not by my exposure 
to founts of wisdom and knowledge." 

—Igor Stravinsky 

At the very beginning of Chapter 1, we pointed out that many feelings we 
think of as "positive" are partly based on censoring aspects of things that we 
might otherwise think of as negative. Thus a certain situation could seem 
"pleasant" to mental processes that are currently active, but might seem 
quite unpleasant to other processes that arc currently being suppressed. 

For example, the process of raising a human child requires years of 
work and worry to feed, clean, dress, teach, shelter, and protect that 
child. What kind of incentive could make one forgo so many other goals 
and become so selfless and other-directed? Of course, we see mother-
love as positive—taut if people had not evolved ways to suppress so many 
kinds of discouraging prospects, no one would have had any descendants. 
Here are a few more examples in which we conceal disagreeable 
aspects of things: 

Humor; Humor is usually seen as positive, despite the fact that 
most jokes are basically negative—in the sense that they almost 
always speak about things that a person should not do, because 
they are socially prohibited or simply absurd or ridiculous. (See 
Minsky 1980.) 

Decisiveness: We often speak of "making a choice," as though 
this were a deliberate act. However, that "action" may, in fact, 
be nothing more than the moment at which you stopped some 
process that was comparing alternatives—and then, by default, 
you simply adopted the one that was then at the top of some list. 
In such a case, a person may speak of using "free will"—but an 
observer could also see it as nothing more than a sort of admission 
(or even a boast) that one does not have a clear idea about what 
mental process produced that result. 


COMMON SENSE 

Beaury: We rend to see beauty as positive—but when people say 
something is beautiful, and you ask what makes them like it so 
much, they are likely to act as though under attack, or to simply 
insist, "I just like it." This might suggest that some process is 
wotking to keep them from noticing defects or blemishes. 

Pleasure: When we think that we're choosing the option that 
pleases us most, the selection may actually come from some process 
that has silenced all its competitors. This, as every addict 
knows, makes it hard to wish for anyrhing else. If so, then the 
more pleasure we feel, the more negative may be that hidden 
effect on the rest of our mental processes! In such cases, "I am 
enjoying this, "could mean, "I want to remain in my present state, so 
I'll try to suppress whatever might change it." 

We also can sometimes disable a process without directly suppressing it, 
by arousing one that competes with it. Fot example. Chapter 8-3 showed 
how one can hold off sleep by imagining a disturbing situation. Or one 
can simply repeat a srimulus until there is no further response to it, as in 
the old tale The Boy Who Cried Wolf. 

Teacher: I was taught that learningworks primarily by using pleasure 
to "reinforce" those connections that have led to success—whereas 
failures deter and discourage us. Therefore, teachers should make 
each lesson pleasant by giving rewards and encouragements. 

This idea that each learning experience should be "positive" was largely 
based on results from research that was mainly done with pigeons and 
rats. Then many educators generalized this to human students, concluding 
that it would be best to teach every subject by very small steps, so that 
pupils will usually meet with success. However, to understand a complex 
situation, one also needs to learn how things can go wrong so that one can 
evade the most common mistakes. 

Teacher: Surely we can develop ways to teach people how to avoid 
mistakes in ways rhat are pleasant and positive. We can reward 
them for getting through complex tasks, for detecting and reacting 
to mistakes, and for persistence and originality. Is there any 
basic reason why resourcefulness, itself, cannot be reinforceable? 


THK EMOTIOIN MACHINK 

In Chapter 9-6, I'll argue that the answer is both yes and no, because it 
involves what might seem a paradox: it is "pleasant" to have accomplished 
a difficult task, but this almost always involves some transient episodes of 
severe distress and discomfort. So for students to learn to do such things, 
I will argue in Chapter 9-4 that those students will need to develop ways 
to tolerate—and even to enjoy-—those painful kinds of episodes. Also, on 
the other side, here are a few other reasons why only rewarding successful 
attempts may not be a very good strategy: 

Reinforcement can lead to rigidity. If a system already works, additional 
"reinforcement" could make some internal connections 
stronger than they need to be. Then this could make it harder for 
that system to later adapt to new kinds of situations. 

Reinforcement can have bad side effects. If a certain resource has 
worked so well that other processes have come to depend on it, 
then any change you make in that resource will be likely to damage 
the performances of those other processes (because unplanned 
changes usually make things worse). 

Papert's Principle:27 Some of the most crucial steps in our mental 
growth are based not simply on acquiring new skills, but on developing 
bettet high-level resources to help us select which already 
existing skills to use. 

I certainly do not mean to suggest that positive reinforcement is bad—but 
we often learn more from a failure rhan from a success, especially when 
we need to learn not only which methods are likely to fail, but also how 
and why those failures occur, as well as what might have caused our thoughts 
to go wrong. In other words, one learns much more when one investigates, 
rather than merely celebrates. 

A skeptical teacher might wonder if the ideas in this section have been 
confirmed by any animal experiments. I would have to answer no, because 
most ol the processes that we've discussed could take place only in reflective 
levels that no other animals possess. 

Student: 1 don't see why reflection has to be involved. Why could 
we not learn from the times we fail, simply by breaking the con



COMMON SENSE

nections we used—so that after you've made a bad mistake, your 
brain will tend less to do it again? 

Removing connections might sometimes work, but exposes us to a different 
risk: whenever you make a change in a system's connections, this 
is likely to impair those other resources that also depend on those same 
connections. If you don't understand how a system works, then you're in 
danger of making it worse by blindly correcting apparent mistakes. 

Programmer: Every attempt to improve a program is likely to 
introduce new bugs. That's why new programs so often contain 
very big sections of ancient code: no one remembers quire how 
they work, and hence they're afraid to change them. So, if something 
is wrong that you need to fix, then it is best to install a small, 
local, "patch" and hope that the rest of the system will still work. 

More generally, you can usually statt to improve a skill by experimenting 
with many small steps—but eventually no more such changes may help, 
because you have reached a local peak. Then further improvement may 
require you to endure some discomfort and discouragement. Here is a 
simple example of this: 

Charles happens to be in Tanzania, He wants to be at the highest 
possible altitude while still remaining on solid ground. So at 
every point he takes his next step in the direction of steepest ascent. 
Eventually, he may end up at the top of a very small hill, bur if he 
is lucky he'll finally get to the top of Mount Kilimanjaro. However, 
his strategy will never reach the summit of Mount Everest—because 
every such route includes some downward steps. 

Of course, this also applies whenever we try to improve a mental ability. 
For a time, we can use that method of "steepest ascent" by making many 
small, pleasant changes. But then, to make any furrher gain, we'll have to 
endure at least some distress. So, while pleasure helps us learn easy things, 
we must learn to "enjoy" some suffering when it comes to learning things 
that need larger-scale changes in how we think. Accordingly, Chapter 9-4 
will suggest that trying to make education too pleasant might hinder 
children from learning to climb the conceptual mountains inside their 
minds. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

tie i 4. 

This chapter discussed the bodies of commonsense knowledge that human 
beings need to get along in the civilized world, 1 touched on many 
questions about what we mean by common sense, what goals are and how 
they work, how we usually reason by making analogies, and how we might 
guess which items of knowledge might be relevant to how we make our 
decisions. I also emphasized the role of "negative" knowledge about how 
to avoid making common mistakes. 

However, it is not enough just to know a lot; we also must put that 
knowledge to work. So the following chapter will talk about the processes 
that we employ in our many everyday ways to think. 


THINKING 


Which feature most clearly distinguishes us from the rest of our animal 
relatives? Surely our most outstanding such trait is our knack for inventing 
new Ways to Think. 

Romanticist: You suggest that our finest distinction is thinking, 
yet perhaps the richness of our mental experience is even more 
special—as in our sense of being alive, or the joy of turning our 
intellect off to enjoy a sunset or listen to birds, or to perform a 
spontaneous song or dance. 

Determinist: People use words like spontaneous to make themselves 
feel that they aren't constrained. But perhaps that sense of 
enjoying ourselves is merely a trick that some parts of our brains 
use to make us do what they want us to do, 

I doubt that we ever stop thinking, because that word refers, at different 
times, to a huge range of intricate processes—and many of these are hidden 
from us. 

Cirizen: If our everyday thinking is so complex, then why does it 
seem so straightforward to us? If its machinery is so intricate, how 
could we be unaware of this? 


THE EMOTION MACIIIM. 

That illusion of simplicity comes from forgetting our infancies, in which 
we grew those abilities. As children, we learned how to pick up blocks 
and arrange them into rows and stacks. Then as each new group of skills 
matured, we built yet more resources on top—just as we learned to plan 
and build more elaborate arches and towers. So each of us built, in those 
early times, the towers of aptitudes that we call "minds." 

But now, as grown-ups, it seems to us that we have always been able 
to reason and think—because we learned those skills so long ago that we 
cannot recall having learned them at all. It took us many years of hard 
work to develop our more mature Ways to Think, but whatever records 
remain of this have somehow become inaccessible. What could have made 
us all victims of that "amnesia ol infancy"? I don't think this is simply 
because we "forgot." Instead, I suspect that it results from our developing 
new and better ways to represent both physical and menral events—and 
some of these methods became so effective that they replaced our previous 
ones. Now, if those old records still exist, we can no longer make sense of 
them. 

In any case, all of us find it so easy to think that we rarely ask good 
questions about what thinking is and how it might work. In particular, we 
like to celebrate grand accomplishment in the sciences, arts, and humanities—
but we scarcely ever recognize rhe marvels of everyday commonsense 
thinking. Indeed, we often see thinking as more or less passive, as though 
our ideas just "occur to us" and we don't deserve any credit for them—as 
when we say, "A thought just entered my mind" instead of "Ijust constructed 
a good new idea." Similarly, we scarcely ever wonder about what chooses 
which subjects we think about. 

One of the wooden doors in my home bears scratches made 
more than a decade ago. Our dog Jenny is gone, but the scratches 
remain. I norice them only a few times a year, though I pass by 
that door several times every day. 

In every hour of every day you encounter great numbers of things and 
events, yet only a few of rhem "get your attention" enough to raise such 
questions as, "What is that object and why is it there," or "Who or what 
caused that happening?" Thus much of the rime, your thoughts seem to 
proceed in a smooth, steady flow in which you scarcely ever reflect on how 
you got from each step to the next. 


THINKING 217 

At other times, though, your mind seems to wander without any sense 
of aim or direction: first you dwell on some social affair; then you reflect 
on some past event; next you're beset by a hunger pang, or the thought 
of a payment that's overdue, or an impulse to fix that faucet drip, or an 
urge to tell Charles haw you feel about Joan, Each item reminds you of 
something else until one of your mental Critics interrupts with, "This isn't 
getting you anywhere," or "You must try to get more organized." 

However, this chapter will be mainly concerned with whar happens 
when your thinking is aimed toward some definite goal but then encounters 
an obstacle, as when you say to yourself, "I can't pack all this into this 
box—and besides, that would tnake it too heavy to lift. "Such a mental event 
is likely to interrupt most of your current processes, and make you stop to 
deliberate: "It looks like this will take several trips, but I don't want to spend 
that much time on this. "At such a point, your efforts may switch from rhe 
goal of packing that box to higher-level reflections about selecting a different 
subject to think about. 

This chapter will focus on the idea that each person has many different 
ways to think-—but first, perhaps, we ought to ask why we have so many 
of these. One answer is that our ancestors evolved through hundreds of 
different kinds of environments, each of which required ways to deal with 
new kinds of situations. However, we never discovered a single, uniform 
scheme that could cope with all those different conditions. Consequently, 
over eons of time, our brains evolved a good many different ways to avoid 
the most common kinds of mistakes. 

This suggests another reason why we evolved so many different Ways 
to Think: if your thoughts were controlled in only a single way, you would 
be in danger of becoming a monomaniac. Of course, such accidents have 
constantly happened in the course of human history, but the genes of those 
individuals do not usually propagate because their bearers lack versatility. 
Indeed, as we noted in Chapter 6-2, although evolution is often described 
as a process of selecting beneficial changes, the bulk of evolution's work 
involves rejecting changes that have bad effects. The result Is that most 
species evolve at the edge of some narrow zone berween the safeties they 
know and the dangers they don't. 

Psychiatrist: That safety zone can be narrow, indeed. Most of the 
time, most minds function well, but sometimes they get into 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 


various states in which they can scarcely function at all—and 
then we say that they're mentally ill. 

Physiologist: Surely most such disorders have medical causes— 
such as traumatic injuries, chemical imbalances, or diseases that 
damage our synapses. 

Programmer: Perhaps, but we should not assume that all such 
disorders have nonmental causes. When a software virus infects a 
computer and changes some data on which the programs depend, 
the hardware may not be damaged at all, but the system's behavior 
may totally change. 

Similarly, a new destructive goal or idea—-or a change in one's Critics or 
Ways to Think—-could gain control of so much of a person's resources and 
time that we would seem to be seeing a different mind. 

Sociologist: Perhaps it's the same for a social organization, when 
the policies of a sect or cult include ways to recognize those recruits 
in whom its ideas and beliefs will propagate. 

In any case, as we evolved the machinery that could supporr new Ways to 
Think, this also forced us to evolve ways to ieatn which of those strategies 
would be useful for dealing with new classes of situations or problem-
types. 

7-1 What Selects the Subjects We Think About? 

What selects what we'll think about next, from among all our various 
interests—-and how long will we persist with each? Let's consider a typical 
everyday incident: 

Joan needs to write a project report but has not made much progress on 
it. Discouraged, she sets those thoughts aside and finds herself roaming 
about her house with no particular goal. She passes an untidy stack 
of books and stops for a moment to straighten them out. But then she 
"gets" a new idea, so she goes to her desk to type a note. She starts to 
type—but finds that the Ton her keyboard is stuck. She knows how to 


THINKING 

fix this, but she worries that then she might forget that new idea—so 

instead she makes a handwritten note. 

What led Joan to notice that pile of books? Why did that that idea "occur" 

to her now instead of at some other time? Lets look more closely at these 

events. 

Joan has not made much progress. Some mental Critic must have 
noticed this and suggested that she "take a break." 

Discouraged she sets those thoughts aside. How will Joan later get 
back to her previous states? Section 7-6 will talk about how she 
could make—-and later retrieve—the contexts of some of her 
previous thoughts. 

Joan is roaming without any goal. Or so it may seem—but most 
animals have instincts to maintain their "territories" or nests. 
Usually, Joan walks right past this spot, but right now she is 
"making rounds" because of being mainly controlled by Critics 
that aim to maintain the tidiness of her home. 

She passes an untidy stack of books and stops for a moment to 
straighten it out. Why doesn'r Joan stop to read those books 
instead of just trying to tidy them up? This is because, right now, 
she represents those books as untidy objects rather than as containers 
of knowledge. 

But then she "gets"a new idea. When people say, "It occurred to 
me," this shows how limited is the extent to which we can reflect 
on how we produce our ideas, 

Joan goes to her desk to type a note. Here, Joan is using a model ol 
herself that represents her knowledge about the qualities of her 
short-term memories. She knows that when she "gets" an idea, 
she cannot depend on remembering it—and so she puts her 
housekeeping on hold to make a more permanent record. 

Perhaps most of the time we mainly react to external events without much 
sense of making decisions. However, our higher-level thinking depends 
much more on our wishes, fears, and larger-scale plans—and this raises 
many questions about how we spend our mental time: 

What schedules our large-scale plans? 
What reminds us of things that we promised to do? 



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

How do we choose among conflicting goals? 

What decides when we should quit or persist? 

So long as everything goes well, such questions rarely occur to you, and 
your thoughts proceed in a steady, smooth flow. Each minor obstacle 
makes only small changes in how yon think, and if you "notice" these at 
all, they merely appear as transient feelings or as fleeting ideas. But, when 
more serious obstacles persist and keep you from making progress, then 
various Critics intervene to make larger changes in how you think. 

7-2 The Critic-Selector Model of Mind 

"1 have yet to see any problem, however complicated, which, 

when you looked at it in the right way, did not become still more 

complicated." 

—Poul A nderson 

We frequently change what we're thinking about, without noticing that 
we are doing this—because it is mainly when some trouble comes that we 
start to reflect about thinking itself. Thus, we don't recognize a problem as 
"hard" until we've spent some time on it without making any significant 
progress. Even then, if that problem does not seem important, you might 
just abandon that line of thought and simply turn to some other subject. 

However, if you have an important goal, then it is useful to notice thar 
you are stuck—and it will be even more useful if you also can recognize 
that you're being blocked by a certain particular type of barrier, obstacle, 
impasse, or snag. For if you can diagnose the particular Type of Problem 
you face, then you can use that knowledge to switch to a more appropriate 
Way to Think. 

This suggests a model of mind based on reacting to "cognitive obstacles." 
We'll call this the "Critic-Selector. " 


CRITICS SELECTORS 
THE CRITIC-SELECTOR MODEL OF MIND 



THINKIMG 221 

Each Ctitic in this diagram can recognize a certain species of "Problem 
Type." When a Critic sees enough evidence that you now are facing its 
type of problem, then that Critic will activate what we shall call a "Selector" 
which tries to start up a set of resources that it has learned is likely to act 
as a Way to Think that may help in this situation. 

Identify 

Switch to a 
a type of suitable Way 
obstacle 

to Think 


Cloud of Resources 

The simplest Critic-Selector system could consist of little more than a collection 
afIf—*Do rules like these: 

Ifa problem seems familiar, Use reasoning by analogy. 
/fir seems unfamiliar. Change the way you're describing it. 
If it seems too difficult, Divide it into several parts. 
ffh still seems difficult, Replace it by a simpler problem, 
//none of these work, Ask someone for help! 


Student: I don't need to insert those Selectors. Why not design 
each Critic to directly turn on a set of resources for solving the 
problem it recognizes—just as you showed in Chapter 1-5? 


I suspect that it was extremely difficult for our ancestors to invent useful 
new Ways to Think—until they evolved ways to make new Selectors by 


THE EMOTION MACHI.NE 

combining smaller sets of parts. So although that student is partly right, 
I suspect that our human brains evolved to include more such machinery 
rather than less. For example, each Critic could recommend the use of not 
just one but several different Selectors: 


Cloud of Resources 

In any case, it seems safe to assume that the brains of our early ancestors 
did not include Selectors at first. But as we came to face increasingly 
complex problems, it would have become increasingly harder to invent 
new Critics that worked efficiently—and it is always easier to invent new, 
useful structures when one already has stocks of older parts that one can 
adapt and recombine. (For example, the Wright brothers made their first 
airplane work by using motorcycle parts.) More generally, until one can 
describe a process in terms of the functions of smaller parts, it will be 
difficult to reflect on how that process works—and then to invent useful 
variations of it. 

For example, Section 8-4 will describe some structures called "K-lines" 
that our brains could use to construct new mental objects and processes 
by combining parts of older ones. 

Of course, when one activates two or more Critics or Selectors, this is 
likely to cause some conflicts, because two different resources might try to 
turn a third resource both on and off.Ta deal with this, we could design 
the system to use various policies like these: 

Choose the resource with the highest priority. 

Choose the one that is most strongly aroused. 

Choose the one that gives the most specific advice. 

Have them all compete in some "marketplace." 


THINKING 223 


However, while competitive strategies might suffice for fairly simple 
brains, I doubt that such schemes would work on larger scales, unless 
supervised by processes that use additional knowledge about how to settle 
particular kinds of conflicts. For example, one might use these more 
reflective policies: 

If'too many Critics are aroused, then describe the problem in more detail. 

If too few Critics are aroused, then make the description more 

abstract, 

^important resources conflict, then try to discover a cause for this, 

//there has been a series of failures, then switch to a different set of 

Critics, 

A brain with good memories of the recent past could recognize later, after 
the fact, that certain selections had serious flaws—and then could proceed 
to try to find ways to refine the Critics that made those mistakes. 

After I selected that method, I realized that I knew a better one. 
I now see that the action I took had an irreversible side efFect. 
I treated something as an obstacle, but now see that it was valuable. 
That method did not actually work, but I learned a lot from using it. 


However, to recognize those kinds of events, we would need more "reflective" 
Critics that work at higher levels—and this suggests that our model 
of mind should include Selectors and Crirics at every level.1 



THE KMOT10N MACHINE 

7-3 EmotionaJ Thinking 

"There is a very fine line between 'hobby' and 'mental illness.'" 
—Dave Barry 

Most of the time, your thinking proceeds in uneventful streams—but 
when you run into obstacles and none of your usual methods help, you 
may resort to mental strategies that may appear to be somewhat irrational. 
For example, when tempted to abandon your task, you can renew your 
motivation by bribing yourself with imagined rewards, or with threats of 
the prospect of failure—or you could try ro shame yourself by imagining 
how you (or your Imprinters) might feel if your performance conflicted 
with your highest values. For even a brief flash of impatience, or of anger or 
desperation, can cut through what seems like a hopelessly tangled knot. 

Each such "emotional" Way to Think can lead to dtfferenr ways to 
deal with things—-either by making you see things from new points of 
view or by increasing your courage or doggedness. If this initiates a large-
scale cascade—and if those changes last for long enough, then you (or 
your friends) may recognize this as a change in your emotional state. 

How long do those states of mind persist? Some last fot no more than 
the blink of an eye, but infatuations persist for days or weeks. However, 
when "dispositions" endure for weeks or years, we regard them to be aspects 
of a person's personality, and call them "characteristics" or "traits." 

For example, when solving a problem, some people tend to accept 
solutions that still have some deficiencies—so long as those answers work 
well enough. You might describe such persons as "realistic," "pragmatic," 
or "practical." Other persons tend to insist that every potential flaw must 
be fixed—and you might call such people "fastidious," except when they 
make you uncomfortable, in which case you call them "obsessive" instead. 
Other such dispositions include being 

Cautious vs. Reckless 

Unfriendly vs. Amicable 

Visionary vs. Practical 

Inattentive vs. Vigilant 

Reclusive vs. Sociable 

Courageous vs. Cowardly 


THINKINC; 225 

in the course of everyday thought, a person is likely to switch among such 
attitudes, often without any notice of this. However, when we encounter 
more serious trouble, our Critics may make enough changes to statt the 
large-scale cascades that we describe in terms of emorional states. 

Psychiatrist: What would happen if too many Critics were active? 
Then your emotions would keep changing too quickly. And if 
those Critics stopped working at all, then you'd get stuck in just 
one of those states. 

Perhaps we can see an example of this in Antonio R. Damasio s book Descartes' 
Error, which describes a patient named Elliot, who had lost some 
parts of his frontal lobes in the course of having a tumor removed. After 
that treatment, he still seemed intelligent, but his friends and employers 
had the sense rhat Elliot was "no longer himself For example, if asked 
ro sort some documents, he was likely to spend an entire day at carefully 
reading just one of those papers—or at trying to decide whether to classify 
them by name, ot by subject or size or date or weight. 

Damasio 1995: "One might say that the patticular step of the 
task at which Elliot balked was actually being carried out too well, 
and at the expense of the overall purpose, , , . True, he was stil! 
physically capable and most of his mental capacities were intact. 
But his ability to reach decisions was impaired, as was his ability 
to make an eflective plan for the hours ahead of him, let alone to 
plan for the months and years of his future." 

The damaged parts of Elliot's brain included certain connections (to the 
amygdala) that are widely believed to he involved with how we control 
our emotions. 

Damasio 1995: "At first glance, there was nothing out of the ordinary 
about Elliots emotions.... However, something was missing. 
.. . He was not inhibiting the expression of internal emotional 
resonance or hushing inner turmoil. He simply did not have any 
turmoil to hush. .. . 1 never saw a tinge of emotion in my many 
hours of conversation with him: no sadness, no impatience, and 
no frustration with my incessant and repetitious questioning." 


THE EMOHON MACHINE 

This led Damasio to suggest that "reduced emotion and feeling might play 
a role in Elliots decision-making failures." However, I'm inclined to turn 
that around to suggest that it was Elliot's new inability to make such decisions 
that reduced his range of emotions and feelings. For perhaps what got 
damaged in Elliot's brain were mainly the Critics (or their output connections) 
that formerly set off the processes that we recognize as emotional 
states. For now he has lost those precious cascades—-and, hence, the emotions 
that he once displayed—because he no longer can use those Critics 
to choose which emotional states to use. 

This still leaves us with many questions about how such systems might 
be organized. So now this chapter will try to describe some of our many 
Ways to Think, as well as some of the Clitics we use to diagnose the types 
of problems that we frequently face. 

7-4 What Are Some Useful Ways to Think? 

"When you want people to think you are brilliant, just imagine the 
wotst thing you could do and then do precisely the opposite." 
—Naomi Judd 

It ought to be a central goal-—both for AI and for Psychology—to find some 
systematic means to classify the ways we try to overcome different types of 
obstacles. But because no good such scheme has yet appeared, I'll just list 
some examples of Ways to Think, beginning with these two extremes: 

Knowing How. The besr way to solve a problem is to already know 
a way to solve tt. However, we may not be able to retrieve that 
knowledge—and often we don't even know that we have it. 

Searching Extensively. When one has no better alternative, one 
could try to search through all possible chains of actions. But 
that method is not often practical because such searches grow 
exponentially. 

However, we each know many other Ways to Think that lie between those 
two extremes, and help to make those searches more feasible. 

Reasoning by Analogy. When a problem reminds you of one that 
you solved in the past, you may be able to adapt that case to the 


THINKING 227 

present situation—if you have good ways to tell which similari


ties are most relevant. 

Dividing and Conquering. If you can't solve a problem all at once, 
then break it down into smaller parts. For example, every difference 
we recognize may suggest a separate subproblem to solve. 

Reformulating. Find a different representation that highlights more 
relevant information. We often do this by making a verbal 
description—-and then "understanding" it in some different way! 

Planning. Consider the set of subgoals you want to achieve and 
examine how they affect each other. Then, with those constraints 
in mind, propose an efficient sequence lor achieving them. 

We all know other techniques that work by first solving a different problem. 

Simplifying. Often a good way to solve a difficult problem is first 
to solve a simpler version that ignores some features of that 
problem. Then any such solution may serve as a sequence of 
stepping-stones for solving the original problem. 

Elevating, If you are bogged down in too many details, describe the 
situation in more general terms. But if your description seems 
too vague, switch to one that is more concrete. 

Changing the subject. Whatever you are working on now, if you 
get discouraged enough, you can always abandon it and simply 
switch to a different task. 

Here are some more reflective Ways to Think: 

Wishful thinking. Imagine having unlimited time and all the 
resources that you might want. If you still cant envision solving 
the problem, then you should reformulate it. 

Self reflection. Instead of further pursuing a problem, ask what 
makes that problem seem hard, ot what you might be doing 
wrong. This can suggest some better techniques—or, instead, 
better ways to spend your time. 

Impersonation. When your own ideas seem inadequate, imagine 
someone better at this, and try to do what that person would do. 
Myself, I do this frequently, by imitating Imprimers and teachers. 


THE EMOTION MACHI Ml 

We also use many other Ways to Think. 

Logical Contradiction. Try to prove that your problem cannot be 
solved, and then look for a flaw in that argument. 

Logical Reasoning. We often try to make chains of deductions. 
However, this can lead to wrong conclusions when our assumptions 
turn out to be unsound.2 

External Representations. If you find thatyoure losing track of 
details, you can resort to keeping records and notes, or drawing 
suitable diagrams. 

Imagination, One can avoid taking physical risks if one can predict 
"What would happen if" by simulating possible actions inside the 
mental models that one has built. 

Of course, if you are not completely alone, you can try to exploit your 
social resources. 

Cry for help. You can behave in ways that may arouse your companions' 
sympathies. 
Ask for help, If your status is high enough, you can persuade or 
command someone else to help*—or even offer ro pay them. 

Thus, everyone has many ways to think, and the following section will 

discuss how your Critics choose which ones to use. However, everyone 

always has one "last resort"—-namely, simply to give up and quit! 

Resignation. Whenever you find yourself totally stuck, you can shut 
down the resources you're using now and relax, lie back, drop 
out, and stop. Then the "rest of your mind" may find an alternative—
or conclude that you don't have to do this at all. 

7-5 What Are Some Useful Types of Critics? 

"Don't pay any attention to the critics. Don't even ignore them." 
—Sam Goldwyn 

We are always developing new Ways to Think, but how do we choose 
which one to use? Our Critic-Selector Model of Mind assumes that our 


THINKING 229 

Critics help to recognize the kinds of predicaments or prospects we face, 
and then recommend selections of ways in which we might deal with 
those situations. Our Critics must be among our most precious resources, 
and each person develops them in different ways—which could be partly 
responsible for each person's individuality. 

But how could our Critics catalog all the impasses, obstacles, and 
snags that make some problems hard to solve? It would be an imporrant 
goal, both for people and for machines, to have systematic classifications 
of all the kinds of problems we frequently face. However, we don't yet 
have orderly ways to do this1—so here we'll merely try to list a few types 
of Critics that people use. 

Innate Reactions and Built-in Alarms. Many types of external events 
arouse detectors that make us quickly react—-such as when an object rapidly 
moves toward you, or a light is too bright, or you touch something 
hot. We're also born equipped with ways to detect certain conditions inside 
our skins-—such as abnormal blood levels of chemicals—along with built-in 
connections that make us react to correct those conditions without any 
need to think about them. 

However, some unexpected touches, sights, ot smells—or feelings of 
hunger, fatigue, or pain—do interrupt the flow of our thoughts. For we'd 
never survive through our infancies unless such emergencies (or opportunities) 
could pull us away from our reveries. We can sometimes succeed 
at suppressing a sneeze, or at stopping ourselves from scratching an itch. 
But it is hard to ignore a baby's cry, an insistently ringing telephone, or an 
amorous opportunity, and when you try to hold your breath, you cannot 
resist the alarm of impending asphyxia. 

Learned Reactive Critics. A typical infant will simply cry when 
exposed to high levels of noise-—but later a child may learn ro react by 
moving to a quieter place. And eventually we learn to deal with obstacles 
by using "delibetative" thinking about them. 

Deliberative Critics. When our first attempt fails to solve a problem, 
we can often discover alternatives, by thinking about what might have 
gone wrong. Here are some tricks we can use for this: 

An action did not achieve the expected effect, (Find a better way to 
predict.) 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Something I did had a bad side effect, (Try to undo some previous 
choice.) 
Achieving one goal made another one harder. (Try them in the 
opposite order.) 
I need additional information, (Search for another relationship.) 

This method works so well that I should try to use it more frequently. 

Reflective Critics. When you try to solve problems by trial and error, 
you use your critics as "diagnosticians"—either to verify that you're making 
progress or to suggest alternative ways to proceed. See Singh 2003b. 

I've made many attempts with no success. (Select another way to 
think.) 
I've repeated the same thing several times. (Some other process must 
be stuck.) 
Achieving a subgoal did not attain its goal. (Split up the problem in 
another way.) 
This conclusion needs more evidence. (Propose a better experiment.) 

This method works so well that 1 should apply it to other realms. 

Self-Reflective Critics. When you can't control the resources you need, 
or try to achieve too many goals at once, then you may start to criticize 
yourself: 

I have been too indecisive. (Try a method that worked on a 

similar problem.) 
I missed a good opportunity. (Switch to a different set of Critics.) 
I yield to too many distractions. (Try to exercise more self-control.) 
I don't have all the knowledge I need. (Find a good book or go back 

to school.) 

This works so well that I should make myself better at it. 

Self-Conscious Critics. Some assessments may even affect one's current 
image of oneself, and this can affect one's overall state: 

None of my goals seem meaningful. (Depression.) 
I'm losing track of what I am doing. (Confusion.) 



THIISKING 231 


I can achieve any goal I like! (Mania.) 

I could lose my job if I fail at this. (Anxiety.) 

My friends might disapprove of this. (Insecurity.) 

This works so well that I should make it my specialty! 

In Chapter 3-5 we noted that the word Critic often has a negative quality 
because it is most often applied only to persons who point out deficiencies. 
And indeed, it would be hard to describe our Correctors, Suppressors, and 
Censors without using negative terms like inhibit, prevent, or terminate. 
However, words Yikt positive and negative usually do not make sense by 
themselves, because recognizing when something goes wrong is frequently 
a critical step toward success. This is why I added an "Encourager" to the 
end of each list above, to make room for "Positive Critics" that can assign 
more priority, time, or resources to the strategy that you are currently 
using. Furthermore, Chapter 9-4 will argue that sometimes you will need 
to endure some discomfort in the course of achieving a goal—and then 
you may need some Encouragers to make yourself persist with yout plan, 
no matter that this involves some suffering. 

How Do We Learn New Selectors and Critics? 

"Honest criticism is hard to take, particularly from a relative, a 
friend, an acquaintance, or a stranger," 
—Franklin P. Jones 

The first rime you're faced with some difficult problem, it will take you 
some time to find its solution—but in the future you will find it easier 
to deal with other, similar situations. This must be because of what you 
learned from that previous experience, but what did you actually learn 
and how? 

Perhaps the simplest way to learn from solving a problem would be 
merely to add a new lf^*Do rule that says "Apply the methods I recently 
used whenever I face a similar problem." However, if solving that problem 
took a long time, then one ought to ask instead, "What kept me from 
solving that problem more quickly? "For if it took a long time to find that 
solution, then one should try to criticize the methods one used for finding 
that answer. So Chapter 8-5 will argue that whenever a problem turns out 
to be "hard," then we should try to assign the credit for our success, not 


THK EMOTION MACHINE 

to the final act itself, but to only those parts of our thinking that actually 
helped to find the solution. 

In other words, we can sometimes improve our Ways to Think by 
creating higher-level Selectors and Critics that help to reduce the sizes of 
the searches we make. However, to make such kinds of credir assignments, 
we'll need to use higher reflective levels of thinking than those that have 
hitherto been proposed in most traditional "theories of learning." 

How do we organize our collections of Critics? How do we make them 
and how do we change them? Do some of our Critics scold other ones 
when they produce poor performances? Are certain minds more productive 
because their Critics are better organized? 

How do we organize our collections of Ways to Think? How do we 
make them and how do we change them? Do some of them recognize when 
other ones tend to produce poor performances? Are certain minds "more 
intelligent" because their Ways to Think are better organized? 

The following sections will atgne that, today, we have no plausible 
answers to questions like these-—and that these issues should be recognized 
as central to the development of psychology. 

7-6 Emotional Embodiment 

Many thinkers have maintained that emotional states ate closely involved 
with out bodies—and that this is why we so often can recognize Happiness, 
Sadness, joy, or Grief from a persons expressions, gestures, and gaits. 
Indeed, some psychologists have even maintained that those bodily activities 
do not merely "express" our emotions, but actually cause them: 

William James 1890: "Our natural way of thinking about , . . 
emotions is that the mental perception of some facts excites the 
mental affection called the emotion, and that this latter state of 
mind gives rise to the bodily expression. My theory, on the contrary, 
is that the bodily changes follow directly the perception of 
the exciting fact, and that our feeling of the same changes as they 
occur is rhe emotion." 

For example, James suggests that when you sense that a rival is insulting 
you, this makes you clench your fist and strike—and that your anger 


THINKING 233 

results directly from your perceiving those physical activities. However, 
this makes little sense to me, because what James calls the "exciting fact" of 
clenching your fist cannot come first, but must come after your brain perceived 
that you were being insulted. Nevertheless, James argues that such 
intermediate thoughts could not have such strong effects by themselves: 

William James 1890: "If we fancy some strong emotion and then 
try to abstract from our consciousness of it all the feciings of its 
bodily symptoms we find we have nothing left behind, no "mind 
stuff" out of which the emotion can be constituted, and that a 
cold and neutral state of intellectual perception is all that remains. 
.. . [I cannot imagine] what kind of an emotion of fear would be 
left if the feeling neither of quickened heart beats nor of shallow 
breathing, neither of trembling lips nor of weakened limbs, neither 
of goose flesh nor of visceral stirrings, were present. . . . Can 
one fancy the state of rage and picture no ebullition in the chest, 
no flushing of the face, no dilation of the nostrils, no clenching of 
the teeth, no impulse to vigorous action, but in their stead limp 
muscles, calm breathing, and a placid face." 

Nevertheless, 1 would argue that all those reactions must start in your brain 
before your body reacts to them, to cause that "impulse to vigorous action." 

Student: But then, why should your body react to them at all? 

The expressions of rage that James depicts (including that clenching 
of teeth and flushing of face) could have served in primordial times 
to help to repel or intimidate the person or creature that one is angry 
with; indeed, any external expression of one's mental state can affect 
how someone else will think. This suggests an idea about what we mean 
when we use our most common emotion-words; they refer to classes of 
mental conditions that produce external signs that make our behaviors 
more predictable to the persons with whom we are dealing. Thus, for our 
ancestors, those bodily signs served as useful ways to communicate such 
so-called "primary" emotions as Anger, Fear, Sadness, Disgust, Surprise, 
Curiosity, and Joy. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Student: Perhaps this could also be because our most common emo


tions evolved long ago when our brains were simpler. Then there were 

fewer levels between our goals and our sensory-motor systems. 

The body and face could also serve as a simple sort of memory: rhose 
states of mind might soon lade away—except that those body expressions 
could help to maintain those states of mind by sending signals back to the 
brain. For without such "mind-body" feedback loops, the "cold and neutral" 
mental states that William James described might not persist for long 
enough to grow into larger-scale cascades. In other words, your external 
expressions of anger may serve not only to frighten your enemies, but to 
also ensure that you will stay frightened for long enough to carry out some 
actions that might save your life. 

For example, your face might display an expression of horror—even 
when no one else is present-—-when you realize that you left the door 
unlocked, or forgot to turn the oven off, or that something that you 
believed was false. After all, you need your body to stay alive, so, given 
that it ts always at hand, it makes sense lor your brain to exploit it as a 
dependable external memory device. 

When we are young, we find it hard to suppress those external expressions, 
but eventually we learn to control most of rhem, to at least some 
degree, so that our neighbors can't always see how we feel. 

Student: If those physical symptoms are not essential parts of 

emotions, then how can we distinguish between emotions and 

other Ways to Think? 

We have many names for emotional states, whereas most ol our other 
Ways to Think (such as those we described in Section 7-4) do not have 
popular names at all—perhaps because we have not developed adequare 
ways to classify them. However, here is one ancient but still useful view 
of what distinguishes the mental conditions that we tend to describe as 
emotional: 

Aristotle b: "The emotions are all those feelings that so change 

men as to affect their judgments, and that are also attended by 

pain or pleasure." 


TNlNKlNt; 235 

In a modern version of this, some psychologists talk about "Valence" 
which refers to the extent to which one's attitude toward some thing or 
situation is generally positive or negative. (See Ortony 1988.) Similarly, 
there is a popular view in which we think of emotion and thoughts as 
complementary, in much the same way that an object's color and shape 
can change independently; we can thus think of each object (or idea) 
as having various "matter-of-fact" or neutral aspects that, somehow, are 
also "colored" by additional characteristics that seem to make it attractive, 
exciting, or desirable—versus disgusting, dull, or repulsive. 

More generally, our language and thoughts are filled with distinctions 
like "positive vs. negative" and "rational vs. emotional." Such pairs are so 
useful in everyday life chat it's hard to imagine replacing them—any more 
than we should discard the idea that the sun rises and sets each day and 
night, although we know that this is because the earth rotates. 

In particular, exaggerating the body's role in emotions can lead to serious 
misconceptions. Do the talents of pianists reside in their fingers? Do 
artists see with talented eyes? No: there is no evidence to suggest that any 
of those body parts think; it's the brain that sits in the driver's seat, as we 
see in the lives of Stephen Hawking or Christopher Reeve. 

7-7 Pbincare's Unconscious Processes 

"We cannot kindle when we will 

The fire which in our heart resides, 

The spirit bloweth and is still, 

In mystery our soul abides: 

But tasks in hours of insight will'd, 

Can be through hours of gloom fulfill'd." 

—Matthew Arnold 

Sometimes you'll work on a problem for hours or days, as when Joan 
worked on her progress report. 

Joan has been thinking about her report for days but has not invented 

a good enough plan. Discouraged, she sets those thoughts aside.. . but 

then an idea "occurs" to her. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

But did Joan really set those thoughts aside, ot did they continue in other 
parts of her mind? Hear a great mathematician recount some similar experiences: 


Henri Poincan: 1913: "Everyday I seated myself at my worktable, 
stayed an hour or two, tried a great number of combinations and 
reached no results." 

Most persons might get discouraged with this—but Poincare was inclined 
to persist: 

"One evening, contrary to my custom, I drank black coffee and 
could not sleep. Ideas rose in crowds; 1 felt them collide until pairs 
interlocked, so to speak, making a stable combination. By the 
next morning .. . I had only to write out the results, which took 
but a few hours." 

Then he describes another event in which his thinking seemed far less 
deliberate: 

"The changes of travel made me forget my mathematical work. 
Having reached Coutances, we entered an omnibus to go some 
place or other. At the moment when I put my foot on the step the 
idea came to me, without anything in my former thoughts seeming 
to have paved the way for it.... I went on with a conversation 
already commenced, but I felt a perfect certainty.'' 

This suggests that the wotk was still being pursued, hidden away in "the 

back of his mind"—until suddenly, as though "out ol the blue," a good 

solution "occurred" to him: 

"There was one [obstacle] however that still held out, whose fall 
would involve the whole structure. But all my etrorrs only served 
at first the better to show me the difficulty. . . . [Some days later,] 
going along the street, the solution of the difficulty that had 
stopped me suddenly appeared to me, .. . I had all the elements 
and had only to arrange them and put them together." 


TH!NWN<; 237 

In the essay from which these quotations come, Poincare concluded that 
when making his discoveries, he must have used activities that typically 
worked in four stages like these: 

Preparation: activare resources to deal with this particular type of 

problem 

Incubation: generate many potential solutions 

Revelation: recognize a promising one 

Evaluation: verify that it actually works 

The first and last of these stages seemed to involve the kinds of high-level 
processes that we characterized as highly reflective ones—whereas incubation 
and revelation usually proceed without our being aware of them. 
Around the start of the twentieth century, both Sigmund Freud and Henri 
Poincar^ were among the first to develop ideas about "unconscious" goals 
and processes. Poincare suggested clearer descriptions of these (but, only 
for mathematical activities) and here are some of his ideas about the stages 
of solving difficult problems. 

Preparation: To prepare oneself for a particular problem, one first may 
need to "clear one's mind" from other goals—for example, by forgetting 
your troubles by taking a walk, or by finding a quieter place to work. One 
also can try to "focus one's mind" by becoming more deliberate—as with 

"It's time to sit down and startmaking a plan,"'or "I must concentrate on this 
problem." And because one can't solve a hard problem all at once, you'll 
have to break it down into smaller parts so that you can start to decide 
which of its features are the important ones. 

Of course, this doesn't solve the problem; instead, as Poincare said, 
"All my efforts only served at firsr the better to show me the difficulty." 
Nevertheless, this helps to make progress because, before you can start to 
solve a problem, you need to find appropriate ways to represent the situation—
just as you must identify the parts of a puzzle before you can start 
to put them together. And until you understand the relationships among 
those parts, you end up wasting too much of your time at making meaningless 
combinations of them—as poet-critic Matthew Arnold said: 

Matthew Arnold 1865: "This creative power works with elements, 

with materials; what if it has not those materials, those elements, 

ready for its use? in that case it must surely wait till they are ready." 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

In other words, blind trial and error won't often suffice; you need to 
impose constraints that generate plausible things to try. 

Incubation: Once the "unconscious mind" is prepared, it can consider 
large numbers of combinations, searching for ways to assemble those fragments 
to satisfy the required relations, Poincare wonders whether we do this 
with a very large but thoughtless search—or if it is done more cleverly, 

Poincare 1913: "If the sterile combinations do not even present 
themselves to the mind of the inventor. . . does it follow that the 
subliminal self, having divined by a delicate intuition that [only 
certain] combinations would be useful, has formed only these, or 
has it rather formed many others which were lacking in interest 
and have remained unconscious?" 

In other words, Poincare asks, how selective are our unconscious thoughts? 
Do we explore a huge number of combinations, or work on the finer 
details of fewer ones? In either case, when we incubate, we will need to 
switch off enough of our usual Critics to make sure that the system will 
not reject too many hypotheses. However, we still know almost nothing 
about how our btains could conduct such a search, nor why some people 
are so much better at this. 

Aaron Sloman 1992: "The most important discoveries in science 
are not discoveries of new laws or theories, but the discovery of 
new ranges of possibilities, about which good new theories or laws 
can be formed." 

Revelation: When should incubation end? Poincare" suggests that it 
continues until some structure is formed "whose elements are so harmoniously 
disposed that the mind can embrace their totality while realizing the 
details." But how does that subliminal process know when it has found a 
promising prospect? 

Poincare 1913: "It is not purely automatic; it is capable of discernment; 
it has tact, delicacy; it knows how to choose, to divine. 


THINKING 23l) 

What do I say? It knows better how to divine than the conscious 
self, since it succeeds where that has failed." 

He conjectures that this ability to detect promising patterns seems to 
involve such elements as symmetry and consistency. 

Poincar^ 1913: "Whar is it indeed that gives us the feeling of 
elegance in a solution, in a demonstration? It is the harmony of 
the diverse parts, their symmetry, their happy balance; it is all that 
introduces order, all that gives unity, that permits us to see clearly 
and to comprehend at once both the ensemble and the details." 

Poincare did not say much more about how those detectors of "elegance" 
might work, so we need more ideas about how we recognize those signs of 
success. Some of those candidates could be screened with simple matching 
tricks. Also, as part of the preparation phase, we select some specialized 
Critics that can recognize progress toward solving our problem, and keep 
these active throughout incubation. 

Evaluation: We often hear advice that suggests that its safe for us to trust 
our "intuitions"—-ideas that we get without knowing how. But Poincare 
went on to emphasize that one cannot always trust those "Revelations." 

Poincar^ 1913: "I have spoken of the feeling of absolute certitude 
accompanying the inspiration .. . but often this feeling deceives us 
without being any the less vivid, and we only find it out when we 
seek to put on foot the demonstrations. 1 have especially noticed 
this fact in regard to ideas coming to me in the morning or evening 
in bed while in a self-hypnagogic state." 

In other words, the unconscious mind can make foolish mistakes. Indeed, 
later Poincare goes on to argue that it often fails to work out the small 
details—so when a "Revelation" suggests a solution, your "Evaluation" 
may find it defective. However, if it is only partially wrong, you may not 
need to start over again; by using more careful deliberation, you may be 
able to repair the incorrect part, without changing the rest of that partial 
solution. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

I find Poincare's scheme very plausible, although we surely also use 
other techniques. However, many thinkers have maintained that the 
process of creative thinking cannot be explained in any way, because 
they find it hard to believe that powerful, novel insights could result 
trom purely mechanical processes—and hence require additional, magical 
talents. Moreover, some theorists question the existence of this sort 
of unconscious processing, and engineer Paul Plsek has summarized 
some such objections: 

Paul Plsek 1996: "Some experts dismiss the notion that creativity 
can be described as a sequence of steps in a model. For example, 
Vinacke 1952 is adamant that creative thinking in the arts does 
not follow a model, and Gestalt philosophers like Wertheimer 

1945 assert that the process of creative thinking . . . does not 
lend itself to the segmentation implied by the steps of a model. 
But while such views are strongly held, they are in the minority, 
.. . In contrast to the prominent role that some models give to 
subconscious processes, Perkins 1981 argues that subconscious 
mental processes are behind all thinking and, theielorc, play no 
extraordinary role in creative thinking." 

After Poincar.^, some similar models of thinking were proposed in Hadamard 
1945, Koestter 1964, Miller 1960, and Newell and Simon 1972—the 
latter two in more computational terms. Perhaps the most extensive study 
of ways to generate ideas is that of Patrick Gunkel (2006). In every such 
model, each new proposed idea is then evaluated by activating appropriate 
critics. Then, if the result still has some defects, one then applies similar 
cycles to each apparent deficiency. In any case, it seems to me that what 
we call "creativity" is not simply an ability to generate completely novel 
conceptions; for a new idea to be useful to us, we must be able to combine 
it with the knowledge and skills we already possess—so it must not be too 
different from ideas with which we're already familiar. 

Collaboration 

We usually think about thinking as a solitary activity that happens inside a 
single mind. However, some people excel ar making new ideas, while others 
do better at refining them—and wonderful things can happen when 
the right pairs of such persons collaborate. It is said tliatT. S. Eliot's poetry 


THINKINC 241 

owed much to Ezra Pound's editing, and that Sullivan's music was most 
inspired when working with Gilbert's librettos. We see another example 
of this in the Nobel Prize autobiographies of Konrad Lorenz and Niko 
Tinbergen: 

Niko Tinbergen: "From the start 'pupil' and 'master influenced 
each other. Konrad's exttaordinary vision and enthusiasm were 
supplemented and fertilized by my critical sense, my inclination 
to think his ideas through, and my irrepressible urge to check our 
'hunches' by experimentation—a gift for which he had an almost 
childish admiration." 

—1973 Nobel lecture 

Konrad Lorenz: "Our views coincided to an amazing degree but 
I quickly realized that he was my superior in regard to analytical 
thought as well as to the faculty of devising simple and telling 
experiments. . . . None of us knows who said what first, but it 
is highly probable that the [concept of] innate releasing mechanisms 
. . . was Tinbergen's contribution." 

—1973 Nobel lecture 

For many people, thinking and learning is largely a social activity—and 
many of the ideas in this book came from discussions with students and 
friends. Some such relationships are productive because they combine different 
sets of aptitudes. However, there are also pairs of partners who have 
relatively similar skills—perhaps the most important of which are effective 
tricks for preventing each other from getting stuck. 

Do We Normally Think "Bipolarly"? 

The processes that Poincare described involved cycles of searching and 
testing in which problems are solved over hours, days, or even years. However, 
many events of everyday thinking petsist for just a few seconds or 
less. Perhaps these, too, begin by spawning ideas, and next selecting some 
promising ones, and then dwelling on their deficiencies! 

1 hi is, suppose thai a typical moment ol commonsensc thinking begins 
with a brief "micro-manic" phase that produces a few ideas; one could then 
quickly look for flaws in these, during a short-lived "micro-depressive" 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

phase. If all this takes place so quickly that your reflective systems don't 
notice it, then each "micro-cycle" would seem to be no more than a typical 
moment of everyday thinking—and the entire process of thinking might 
seem to go in a steady, smooth, uneventful flow.4 

The quality of each Way to Think would partly depend on how 
much time is spent in each phase. For example, when one is inclined 
to be "skeptical," one might shorten the "Incubation" phase and spend 
more time at "Evaluation." But if anything went badly wrong with how 
those durations were controlled, then (as we noted in Chapter 3-5) some 
of those phases might last for so long that they might appear as symptoms 
of a "manic-depressive" type of disorder. 

7-8 Cognitive Contexts 

No matter what you are trying to do, other temptations may attract your 
attention. Most such distractions can be ignored, but not when your task 
interrupts itself because one of its subgoals must first be achieved, or you 
must deal with some other emergency. Then you must put your present 
job on hold while switching to some other Way to Think that may require 
you to use some other resources and bodies of knowledge. 

But after that matter has been resolved, how can you get back to your 
original job without having to start all over again? To do this, you'll need 
to reconstruct some aspects of your previous state of mind, which might 
include these kinds of ingredients: 

Your previous goals and priorities 

The representation you used for them 

The bodies of knowledge you had engaged 

The sets of resources that were active then 

The Selectors and Critics that were involved 

This means that our model of mind needs places to store these various 
kinds of contextual knowledge. Otherwise, each "train of thought" would 
be disrupted by every interruption. In simpler brains, it might suffice to 
maintain only a single such memory. However, minds that look several 
steps ahead, or work with elaborate subgoal trees, must be able to rapidly 
switch among several different context-sets—because each step or subgoal 
may need different ways to represent its current state. So as our human 


THINKING 243 


minds grew more complex, we needed to evolve more machinery to enable 
all those processes to keep track of their different contexts. 

In popular folk-psychology, we simply imagine all that stuff to be stored 
in our "short-term memories"—as though we could put such things into 
a box and take them out whenever we want. However, this image is too 
simple because we know that different parts of each person's brain are 
involved with different forms of memory—-which are sometimes classified 
under such names as sensory, episodic, autobiographical, semantic, declarative, 
and procedural. Chapter 8-7 will discuss some possible forms in which 
those rypes of memory might be stored, but at present we still know very 
little about the structures that human brains actually use. So here we'll just 
ignore such details and simply imagine that all those records are stored in 
various parts of what we'll call the "context box.'"' 


If you asked Joan what she was thinking about in the episode described 
in Section 7-1, she might mention the subject of tidying up. Further 
questions might reveal that she was maintaining several different representations 
ot the changes she was planning to make—and, to enable her 
to switch among these, she must be able to store and retrieve various kinds 
of structures that describe 

Her current collection of subgoal trees 

Some records of recent external events 

Some descriptions of: recent mental acts 

Her presently active fragments of knowledge 

Simulations used to make her predictions 

This means that Joan's context box for "tidying up" must keep track of 
various aspects of that task. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 


Also, of course, other topics and subjects have been "on her mind" for 
longer spans of time, so she'll need to keep track of several such contexts, 
not only at different levels but also in different mental realms. 

Context Selectors for Various Jobs 


Why would we need such elaborate systems to keep track of our mental 
contexts? To us, it seems perfectly natural that after any brief interruption— 
such as to answer a question that someone has asked, or to pick up a tool that 
you have just dropped—-we can usually get back to our previous states without 
needing to start all over again. It is the same when we interrupt ourselves to 
attend to a subgoal of a task, or briefly to think in some different way. 

When such a diversion is small and brief, this causes little trouble 
because it leaves most of our active resources unchanged. However, a 
larger-scale change could cause more disruption and result in wasted time 
and confusion. So as we evolved more ways to think, we also evolved 
machinery for more quickly returning ro previous contexts. This figure 
starts to combine all these ideas, to show a system in which there are similar 
structures for several different levels and realms. 


THINKII\<; 245 


In everyday life, all these functions proceed so automatically that we 
have almost no sense they're happening, and we answer most questions 
about such matters by saying that we're just using our "short-term memories." 
However, any good theory of how this might work must also answer 
questions like these: 

How Long Do Recent Records Persist, and How Do We Make 
Room for New Ones? There must be more than one answer to that 
because various parts of the brain must work in somewhat different ways. 
Some memories may be permanent, while others may rapidly fade away, 
unless they happen to get "refreshed." Also, some records would get erased 
if stored in a "place" that has a limited size-—because each new item might 
have to replace some records that are already there. Indeed, one thing 
that makes modern computers so fast is that, whenever data is created or 
retrieved, it first is stored in what is called a "cache"—a device that has 
been designed to be especially quickly accessible. Then, whenever such a 
cache gets full, its oldest records get erased—although some of them may 
have been copied to larger, more permanent memory boxes. 

How Do Some Memories Become Permanent? There is evidence 
that it rakes hours or days for short-term memories to be converted to 
longer-term ones. Most previous theories about this assumed that frequent 
repetitions made the original record more permanent. However, it seems 
more likely to me that new memories are briefly maintained in resources 
that act like a computer's cache—and then, over time, more permanenr 
versions are creared in other regions of our brains. See Chapter 8-4. 

In any case, some memories seem to last for the rest of one's life. 
However, this could be an illusion because they might need "refreshment" 


THF EMOTION MACHINE 

from time to time. Thus, when you recall a chiidhood memory, you often 
also have the sense of having remembered the same thing previously; this 
makes it hard for you to know whether you have retrieved an original 
record or merely a later copy of it. Worse yet, there now is ample evidence 
that those records can be changed while they're being refreshed/1 

How Do We Retrieve Old Memories? We all know that our memories 
often fail—as when we try to recall some important details but find 
that their records have disappeared, or that at least we cannot retrieve 
them right now. Clearly, if no trace of that record remains, further search 
would be a futile quest. Nevertheless, we frequently manage to find some 
clues that we can use to reconstruct more of those memories. Here is a 
very old theory of this: 

Augustine 397: "But what happens when the memory itself loses 
something, as when we forget anything and try to recall it? . . . 
Perhaps the whole of n had not slipped our of memory; but a 
part was retained by which the other lost part was sought for, 
because the memory realized that it was not working so smoothly 
as usual, hence, it demanded the restoration of what was missing. 
For example, suppose we see or think of some man we know, and, 
having forgotten his name, try to recall it-—but some other thing 
presents itself, which was not previously associated with him; then 
this is rejected, until something comes into the mind which better 
conforms with our knowledge." 

In other words, once you manage to link a few of those fragments together, 
you may be able to reconstruct a good deal more: 

Augustine 397: ". -- by gathering together those things that the 
memory already contains but in an indiscriminate and confused 
way .. . [so that] where they formerly lay hidden, scattered, or 
neglected, they now come easily to present themselves to the 
mind which is now familiar with them."7 

Augustine soon turned to other concerns, and concluded this discussion 
of memory by plaintively asking, "Who will work this out in the juture?" 
But mote than a thousand years were to pass before there was much further 
progress on theories about how our memories work. 


THHNKING 

How Many Thoughts Can You Think at Once? 

How many feelings can you feel at once? How many different objects or 
ideas can you simultaneously "pay attention'' to? How many contexts can 
be active at once in your context box? To what extent can you be aware of 
how many mental activities? 

The answers to such questions depend on what we mean by "aware" 
and "attention." We usually think of "attention" as positive, and highly 
regard those persons who are able to "concentrate" on some particular 
thing, without getting distracted by other things. However, we could also 
see "attention" as negative—because not all of our resources can function 
at once, so there is always a limit to the range of things that we can think 
simultaneously. Nevertheless, we can train ourselves to overcome at least 
some of those built-in constraints. 

In any case, in our high-level thinking we can maintain only a few different 
"trains of thought" before we start to become confused. However, 
at our lower reactive levels, we carry on many different activities. Imagine 
that you are walking and talking among yout friends while carrying a glass 
of wine:" 

Your grasping resources keep hold of the cup. 

Your balancing sysrems keep the liquid from spilling. 

Your visual systems recognize things in your path. 

Your locomotion systems steer you around those obstacles. 

All this happens while you talk, and none of it seems to require much 
thought, although dozens of processes must be at work to keep that fluid 
from spilling out—while hundreds of other systems work to move your 
body around. Yet few of these processes "enter your mind" as you roam 
about the room—presumably because they are operating in separate 
realms (or separate portions of your brain) whose resources don't come 
into conflict with the subject you're most actively "thinking about." 

It is much the same with language and speech. You rarely have even 
the faintest sense of what selects your normal response to the words of 
your friends, or which ideas you choose to express—nor of how any of 
your processes work to group your words into phrases so that each gets 
smoothly connected to the next. All this seems so simple and natutal that 
you never wonder how your context box keeps track of what you have 
already said-—-as well as to whom you have said those things. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

What limits the number of contexts that a person can quickly turn on 
and off? One very simple theory would be that each context box has a limited 
size, SO there is only a certain amount of room in which to store such 
information. A better conjecture would be that each of our well-developed 
realms acquires a context box of its own. Then, some processes in each of 
those realms could do work on their own, without getting into conflicts 
until they have to compete for the same resources. 

For example, it's easy to both walk and talk because these use such 
different sets of resources. However, it is much harder to both speak and 
wtite (or to listen and read) simultaneously, because both tasks will compete 
for the same language resources. I suspect such conflicts get even 
worse when you think about what you're thinking about, because every 
such act will change what is in the context box that tries to keep track of 
what you were thinking about. 

At our higher reflecrive levels, our representations span many scales of 
time and space that can range from thinking "I'm holding this cup"'to "I am 
a mathematician," ox "I am a person who lives on the Earth." To be sure, a 
person may have the impression of thinking all these simultaneously, but 
I suspect that these are constantly shifting and that our sense of thinking 
them all at once comes partly from the Immanence Illusion we discussed 
in Chapter 4-1, because the contents of our various context boxes are so 
rapidly accessible. 

What Controls the Persistence of Processes? 

Edmund Burke 1790: "He that wrestles with us strengthens 
our nerves and sharpens our skill. Our antagonist is our helper. 
This amicable conflict with difficulty obliges us to an intimate 
acquaintance with our object and compels us to consider it in all 
its relations. It will not suffer us to be superficial." 

Whatever you happen to be doing righr now, you could have chosen other 
alternatives, and whatever you're trying to think about, you have other concerns 
that compete with it. So we all have thoughts and feelings like these: 

"I've been spending so much time on this problem that I am losing 

my motivation; besides, it has gotten so complex that I simply can


not keep track of it; perhaps I should quit and do something else," 


THINKIMG 249 

When none of the methods we've tried have worked, how much longer 
should we persist? What determines when we should quit—and lose 
whatever investment we've spent? We always have at least some concern 
with how we conserve our materials, energy, money, and friends—and 
each such concern would seem to suggest that we have some Critics that 
detect when each particular element may be getting into short supply, and 
then suggest ways to conserve or replenish it. Such Critics would lead us 
to think, "I'm doing too many things at once," or "I can't afford to buy both of 
these," or "/ don't want to lose my friendship with Charles." 

The simplest way to conserve your time is to abandon the goals that 
consume too much of it. But renouncing goals will often conflict with 
your ideals, as when they arc jobs that you've promised to do; then you 
might want to suppress those ideals, or even regard them as handicaps. 
However, going against your high-level values can lead to cascades that 
you recognize as Tension, Guilt, Distress, or Fear—along with the Shame 
and Humiliation we talked about in Section 7-3. So making such decisions 
can thus cause you to become "emotional." 

Citizen: But certain well-disciplined persons seem able to set such 

emotional feelings aside, and simply do what seems "rational." 

Why do most other people find this so hard to do? 

It seems to me that it's only a myth that there exists any single "rational" 
way to think. One is always comparing various goals, and deciding 
which ones to put aside or postpone—and one will never make much 
progress toward achieving any particular goal unless one can persist at it 
for long enough. This means that every Way to Think will need at least 
some ability to keep other processes from stopping it—and this could be 
done to some extent by controlling which Critics are active. In Chapter 
3-7 we discussed some reasons why we must not keep all our Critics on all 
the time, and here are a few more issues involved with this: 

What if your set of active Critics does not change? Then you would 
likely keep repeating the same approach because, after each 
attempt to change your Way to Think, those Critics would try 
to switch you back again—and you might get stuck with a "onetrack 
mind." 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

What if some Critics stay on alt the time? Certain Critics must 
always be active to make us react to serious hazards—but if these 
are not selected carefully, it could lead to obsessive behaviors by 
making you focus too much of the time on only a few particular 
subjects. 

What if all your Critics get turned off? Then all your questions 
would seem to be answered because you are no longer able to 
ask them, and all your problems would seem to be gone because 
nothing would seem to have any flaws. 

Everything may seem wonderful during such a "mystical experience," but such 
revelations usually fade when enough of your Critics get turned back on. 

What if too many Critics are active at once? Then you'd keep noticing 
flaws to correct and spending so much time repairing them 
that you would never get any important things done, and your 
friends may perceive you as depressed. 

What if too many Critics are turned off? If you can ignore most 
alarms and concerns, that would help you to "concentrate," but 
it also might lead you to ignote many errors and flaws. However, 
the fewer Critics you activate, the fewer goals you will try to pursue, 
and that could make you become too mentally dull. 

What if your Critics too often get switched? Your thinking would 
become chaotic if too many goals were to freely compete without 
any larger-scale management. 

Then what should determine which Critics are active? Sometimes we need 
to concentrate, but we must also respond to emergencies-—and all this 
suggests that it would be dangerous for us to have a single, centralized 
system that too firmly controls which of our Critics are active. 

Generally, low-level selections have briefer effects, as when one of 
your block-building Critics insists, "Make sure that your elbow wont topple 
that block!' This will alter your short-term tactics without changing your 
overall strategy—and even if you should make a mistake, you may be able 
ro make a correction and continue with your original plan. 

However, higher-level failures lead to larger-scale changes in strategies—
for example, by arousing self-reflective thoughts that cause you to 
"brood" about what the future might hold for you or about your social 


THINKING 

relationships, as in, 1 don't have enough self discipline," ot "My friends will 
lose their respect for me," or "/ lack the aptitude to solve this kind of problem. 
Perhaps 1 should switch to a different profession."'Such processes could lead 
to the large-scale cascades that people call "emotional." 

7-() Central Problems for Human Psychology 

"No problem is so formidable that you cannot walk away from it." 
—Charles Schulz 

Much recent research in psychology has been more concerned with how 
large groups ol people behave than about the particular ways in which 
each individual person thinks. In other words, at least in my view, those 
studies have become too statistical. I find this disappointing because, in 
my view of the history of psychology, far more was learned, for example, 
when Jean Piagct spent several years observing the ways that three children 
developed, or when Sigmund Freud took several years to examine the 
thinking of a rather small number of patients. 

Statistical psychologist: But when you study a sample so very 
small, then you may come to conclusions that won't generalize to 
larger populations. This puts you in danger of finding rules thar 
apply only to that particular few. 

I'm afraid that the opposite danger is worse, because this statistical type of 
research can miss good ideas about how any particular person works—thus 
overlooking rhe small but vital details. For example, when psychologists 
ask, "Does passively watching violence in films make people more aggressive in 
real life?" some statistical studies suggest that there is only a small correlation 
between these. 

However, this can lead to a wrong conclusion, if one also goes on to 
assume that a small correlation implies a small effect—because a small correlation 
can appear when two ot more different large effects happen to 
cancel each other out!'* The trouble is, that kind of information can simply 
disappear in statistical research—unless those studies look more closely to 
show how different individuals may use different Ways to Think about the 
very same kinds of situations. 

It seems to me that this is why, although statistical methods were highly 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

productive in early experiments on animals, they rarely led to good, new 
ideas about the levels at which only people can think. This is why I want 
to emphasize the importance of trying to classify the Types of Problems 
that people recognize, the Ways to Think that we develop, and how we 
learn which Ways to Think can help us to deal with each of those different 
Problem Types. Here are a few low-level Problem Types: 

Some obstacle is in the way. 
My goal didn't achieve its supergoal. 
I don't have access to knowledge I need. 
One of my predictions has failed. 
Two of my subgoals seem incompatible. 
I cannot get this method to work. 


Many Problem Types occur at higher, more reflective levels. 

This problem is too difficult. (Divide it into smaller parts.) 
I can't. (Switch to a different representation.) 
1 can't control the resources I need. (Stop to think, and reorganize.) 
This situation keeps repeating. (Switch to a different method.) 
I can't think of any worthwhile goals. (Become depressed.) 
I'm losing track of what I'm doing. (Recognize a cause for confusion.) 


Similarly, whenever we switch between different Ways to Think, we also 
must switch among contexts like these: 

Collections of subgoals with different priorities 
Allocations of time and effort to spend 
Particular ways to represent each situation 
Ways to detect progress on each problem 
Particular ways to make predictions 
Ways to find analogies with similar problems 


All this suggests that if we want to better understand the higher levels 
of human thought, we should ask our researchers-—both in Al and in 
psychology—to put higher priorities on discovering ways ro describe and 
classify the Problem Types that people face, the Ways to Think we use to 
deal with them, and the higher-level organizations we use to manage our 


THINKING 253 


mental resources. The lack of good theories about subjects like these could 
be why our bookshelves are filled with so much advice about ways for 
people to help themselves. It seems to me that this demonstrates the need 
for more research on questions like these, to discover more about how our 
everyday thinking works. 

What are the principal Problem Types that our mental Crirics 
recognize? 
What are the major Ways to Think that our mental Selectors 
engage? 
How are our brains organized to manage all those processes? 

Here is how William James once tried to depict what happens when he 
tries to think: 

William James 1890: "I am aware of a constant play of furtherances 
and hindrances in my thinking, of checks and releases, tendencies 
which run with desire, and tendencies which run the other way. . . 
welcoming or opposing, appropriating or disowning, striving with 
or against, saying yes or no." 

Chapter 8 will talk about some of the features that give human thinking 
its resourcefulness, and Chapter 9 will suggest some ideas about how all 
those abilities might combine to form the things that we call "minds." 


8 


RESOURCEFULNESS 


8 -1 Resourcefulness 


Descartes 1637: "Although machines can perform certain things 
as well as or perhaps better than any of us, they infallibly fall short 
in others, from which we may discover that they did not act from 
knowledge, but only from the arrangements of their parts," 

We all are accustomed to using machines that are stronger and taster than 
people are. But before the first computers appeared, it was hard to see how 
any machine could do more than only one particular kind of task. Pethaps 
this was why Descartes went on to say that no machine would ever be as 
resourceful as a person can be. 

Descartes 1637: "For while reason is a universal instrument which 
can apply to every situation, a machine's parts need a particular 
arrangement for each particular action; therefore it is impossible for 
a single machine to have enough diversity to enable it to act in all 
the events of life in the same way as our reason causes us to act." 

In earlier eras there also seemed to be unbridgeable differences between 
the capacities of humans and other animals. Thus, in The Descent of Man, 
Darwin observes, "Many authors have insisted that man is divided by an 
insuperable barrier from all the lower animals in his mental faculties." 


RESOURCEFUIMiSS 

However, Darwin suggests that this difference may be merely a matter of 
degree. 

Charles Darwin 1871: "It has, I think, now been shewn that 
man and the higher animals, especially the primates .. . all have 
the same senses, intuitions, and sensations,—similar passions, 
affccrions, and emotions, even the more complex ones, such as 
jealousy, suspicion, emulation, gratitude, and magnanimity; . . . 
they possess the same faculties of imitation, attention, deliberation, 
choice, memory, imagination, the association of ideas, and 
reason, though in very different degrees." 

Then he observes that "the individuals of each species may graduate in 
intellect from absolute imbecility to high excellence," and argues that even 
the highest forms of human thought could have developed from such 
variations—because he sees no particular point at which this would meet 
any intractable obstacle. 

Charles Darwin 1871: "That such evolution is at least possible, 
ought not to be denied, for we daily see these faculties developing 
in every infant; and we may trace a perfect gradation from the 
mind of an utter idiot .. . to the mind of a Newton." 

Nevertheless, we would still like to know more details about the sequence of 
transitional steps that led from animal minds to human ones. In fact, there 
are still people who insist that such changes must have been too complex to 
be found by small yet useful variation. However, it appears to me that most 
of those skeptics are ignorant of this astonishing yet simple fact: 

It needs only a few small structural changes to vastly increase what 
simple computing machines can achieve. This was not known 
until 1936, when Alan Turing discovered how to make a "Universal" 
computer—that is, a single machine which, all by itself, could 
do all the things that all other computers can possibly do. 

Specifically, Alan Turing showed how to make a machine that can 
inspect a description of any other machine—and then interpret that 
description as rules for doing just what that other machine would do.1 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Also, then we could make such a machine to remember descriptions of 
several other machines and then—by switching among those different 
descriptions—that same machine can, step by step, do all that those 
other machines can do. 

In other words, Turing showed how a single, "Universal" machine 
could use many different Way? to Think—and today, all modern computers 
use that very same trick of storing descriptions of other machines. (In 
fact, those are just what "computer programs" are.) This is why we can use 
the same computer to arrange our appointments, edit our texts, or help 
us send messages to our friends. Furthermore, once those descriptions are 
stored inside a computer, we can also write programs t-har can change other 
programs so that the machine can use those new programs to keep extending 
its own abilities. This showed that the limits which Descartes observed 
were not inherent in machines but resulted from our old-fashioned ways 
to build or to program them. For until our modern computers appeared, 
each machine that we built in the past had only one way to accomplish its 
task, whereas each person, when stuck, has alternatives. 

Nevertheless, many thinkers still maintain that machines can never 
achieve such feats as composing great theories or symphonies. Instead, they 
prefer to attribute such feats to inexplicable "talents" or "gifts." However, 
those abilities will seem less mysterious once we see how our resourcefulness 
could result from having multiple Ways to Think. Indeed, each 
previous chapter of this book discussed some way in which our minds 
provide such alternatives: 

Chapter I. We are born with many kinds of resources. 

Chapter 2. We learn from our Imprinters and friends. 

Chapter 3. We also learn what we ought not to do. 

Chapter 4. We can reflect upon what we are thinking about. 

Chapter 5. We can predict the effects of imagined actions. 

Chapter 6. We use huge stores of commonsense knowledge. 

Chapter 7. We can switch among different Ways to Think. 

This chapter discusses yet additional features that make human minds so 
versatile. 

Section 8-2. We can see things from many points of view. 
Section 8-3. We have ways to rapidly switch among these. 



RESOURCEFULNESS 

Section 8-4. We have developed special ways to learn very quickly. 
Section 8-5. We learn efficient ways to retrieve relevant knowledge. 
Section 8-6. We keep extending the range of our Ways to Think. 
Section 8-7- We have many different ways to represent things. 
Section 8-8. We develop good ways to organize these representations. 


At the start of this book, we noted that it is hard to conceive of ourselves 
as machines, because no machine that we've seen in the past seemed to 
understand the meanings of things. Some philosophers argue that this 
must be because machines are merely material things, whereas meanings 
exist in the world of ideas, which lie outside the realm of physical things. 
However, Chapter 1 suggested that we, ourselves, have constrained our 
machines by defining those meanings so narrowly that we fail to express 
their diversity: 

If you "understand" something in only one way, then you scarcely 
understand it at all—because when something goes wrong, you'll 
have no place to go. But if you represent something in several 
ways, then when one method fails, you can switch to another. 
That way, you can turn things around in your mind to see them 
from different points of view—-until you find one that works for 
you! 

To show how this kind of diversity makes human thinking so versatile, 
we'll start by discussing the multiple methods that people use to estimate 
our distance from things. 

8-2 Estimating Distances 

Why has not man a microscopic eye? 
For this plain reason, man is not a fly. 
Say what the use, were finer optics giv'n, 
T' inspect a mite, not comprehend the heav'n? 


—Alexander Pope, in Essay on Man 

When you're thirsty, you look for something to drink—and if you notice 
a nearby cup, you can simply reach out to pick it up—but if that cup lies 
farther away, then you will have to move over to it. But how do you know 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

which things you can reach? A. naive person sees this as no problem at all, 
because "you just look at a thing and you see where it is." But when Joan 
detected that oncoming car in Chapter 4-2 or grasped that book in Chapter 
6-1, how did she know its distance from her? 

In primeval times we had to guess how close our predators were to us; 
today we only need to judge if we have enough time to cross the street—but, 
still, our lives depend on this. Fortunately, we each have many different 
ways to estimate the distance to things. 

For example, you know that a typical cup has about the size of a 
human hand. So if a cup fills as much of the scene as does your outstretched 
hand, then you can reach it from where you stand. Similarly, you 
can judge how far you are from a typical chair because you already know 
its approximate size. 

However, even when you don't know an object's size, you stiil have 
ways to estimate its distance from you. For example, if you can assume 
that rwo things are of similar size, then the one that looks smaller is farther 
away. Of course, that assumption may be wrong, if one of those objects is 
a small model or toy. And also, whenever two objects overlap, then the one 
in front must he closet to you, regardless of its apparent size. 


You can also get spatial information from how the parts of a surface 
are lighted or shaded, and from an object's perspective and context. 
Again, such clues are sometimes misleading; the images of the two blocks 
at the right below are identical, but the context suggests that they have 
different sizes. 



RESOURCEFULNESS

If you assume that two objects He on the same level surface, then the 
one that looks higher lies farther away. Also, finer-grained textures look 
farther away, and so do things that look hazier. 


You can also judge a distance to an object by the difference between 
the directions from it to your two eyes or by the small differences between 
two images. 


In addition, if an object is moving, then the closer it is to you, the 
faster it will appear to move. You can also estimate its range by how you 
must change the focus of the lens of your eye. 


Finally, aside from all these perceptual schemes, one frequently knows 
where an object is without using any vision at all—because if you've seen 
that thing in the recent past, its location is still in your memory! 

Student: Why would we need so many different methods, when 

surely just two or three would suffice? 

In almost every waking minute, we make hundreds of judgments of distance, 
and yet we scarcely ever fall down the stairs or accidentally walk 
into doors. Yet each of our separate ways to estimate distance has many 


THE EMOTIOIV MACHINE 

different ways to fail. Focusing works only on nearby things—and many 
persons can't focus at all. Binocular vision works over a longer range, but 
quite a few people are unable to compare the images in their two eyes. 
Some methods fail when the ground isn't level, and texture and haze are 
not often available. Knowledge applies only to objects you know, and an 
object might have an unusual size—yet we scarcely ever make fatal mistakes 
because we can use so many different techniques. 

But if every method has virtues and faults, how do we know which 
ones to trust? The next few sections will discuss some ideas about how we 
manage so quickly to switch among so many Ways to Think. 

Student: Why would we actually need to switch? Why can't we 

use all those methods at once? 

There are always limits to how many things a person can do simultaneously. 
You can touch, hear, and see things concurrenrly because those 
processes use different parts of the brain. But few of us can draw two 
different things at once with both hands—presumably because these compete 
for resources that can do only one of those things at a time. 

8-3 Panalogy 

We have seen how useful it is to know many different ways to achieve the 
same goal. However, switching between alternatives could slow us down, 
unless we had ways to do it rapidly. This section will describe some machinery 
that our brains might use to do such switching almost instantly. 

For example, when you read, "Charles gave Joan the book," in Chapter 
6-1, you could have interpreted "book" in different realms—for example, 
as a physical object, a person's possession, or as a public storehouse of 
knowledge. Yet when you shift between those realms, that same sentence 
tells three different stories, as "Joan" changes from a spatial location into a 
recipient of a gift, and then into a person who is likely to read that book. 
Furthermore, you can switch between those meanings so quickly that you 
have almost no sense of doing this/ In Chapter 6-1, we introduced the 
term panalogy to describe a scheme in which corresponding features of 
different meanings are connected to the very same parts of just one larger 
structure. 


RESOURCEFULNESS 


Similarly, you can think of an automobile as a vehicle, or as a complex 
mechanical object, or as a valuable possession—and you can regard a city 
as a place for people to live, as a network of social services, or as an object 
that requires water, food, and energy. Chapter 9 will argue that, whenever 
you think about your Self, you are reflecring about a panalogy of mentai 
models of yourself. 

1 suspect that we use the same technique for understanding visual 
scenes. For example, whenever you walk into a room, you expect to see the 
opposite walls, but you know that you will no longer see the door through 
which you entered that room. 


Now walk to the west wall that is now to your left, and turn yourself to 
face to the right; then you will be facing toward the east. 



 THfc. EMOTION MACHINE 

The south wall has now come into view, and the west wall is now in 
back of you. Yet although that wall now is out of sight, you have no doubt 
that it still exists. What keeps you from believing that the south wall just 
now began to exist, or thar the west wal! has actually vanished? This must 
be because you assumed all along that you are in a typical boxlikc room. 
So of course you knew just what to expect: all four sides of that room will 
still exist. 

Now consider that each time you move to another place, every object 
that you have seen may now project a different shape onto the retinas in 
your eyes—and yet those objects do not seem to have changed! For example, 
although the visual shape of that notth wall has changed, you still see it 
as rectangular. What makes those meanings remain the same?-1 Similarly, 
you now see an image of that chair in which it appears to have turned 
around—bur you usually don't even notice this, because your brain knows 
that it h you who has moved and not the chait. Also, you now can see the 
door through which you entered—yet none of this sutptises you! 

What if you next turn righr to face the south? Then the north wall 
and chair will disappear, and the west wall will reenter the scene—-just as 
anyone would expect. 


You are constantly making these kinds of predictions without any 
sense of how your brain deals with that flood of changing appearances: 

How do you know which things still exist? Which of them have actually altered 
their shapes? Which of them have actually moved? How do you know that you 
are still in the same room? 

Student: Perhaps those questions do not arise because we're seeing 
those objects continuously. If they suddenly changed, we'd notice 
this. 

In fact, our eyes are always darting around, so our vision is far from continuous.
4 All this evidence seems to suggest that even before you entered 


RESOURCEFULNESS

that room, you have already, somehow, assumed a good deal of what you 
were likely to see. 

Minsky 1986: "The secret is that sight is intertwined with memory. 
When face to face with someone you newly meet, you seem 
to react almost instantly—but not as much to what you see as 
to what that sight "reminds" you of. The moment you sense the 
presence of a person, a world of assumptions are aroused that are 
usually true about people in general. At the same time, certain 
superficial cues remind you of particular people you've already 
met. Unconsciously, then, you will assume that this stranger must 
also resemble them, not only in appearance bur in other traits as 
well. No amount of self- discipline can keep those superficial similarities 
from provoking assumptions that may then affect your 
judgments and decisions." 

What would happen if every time you moved, you had to re-recognize 
every object in sight? You would have to reguess what each object is, and 
get evidence to support that conjecture. If so, then your vision would be 
so unbearably slow that you would be virtually paralyzed! But clearly this 
is not the case, because: 

Minsky 1974: "When we enter a room, we seem to see the entire 
scene almost instantly. But, really, it takes time to see—to apprehend 
all the details and see if they confirm our expectations and 
beliefs. Our first impressions often have to be revised. Still, how 
could so many visual cues so quickly lead to consistent views? 
What could explain the blinding speed of sight?" 

Answer: We don't need to constantly "see" all those things because we build 
virtual worlds in our heads. Hear one of my favorite neurobiologists: 

William H. Calvin 1966: "The seemingly stable scene you normally 
see' is really a mental model that you construct—the eyes 
are acrually darting all around, producing a retinal image as jerky 
as an amateur video, and some of what you thought you saw was 
instead filled in from memory." 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

"We make those mental models so fluently that we feet no need to ask 
ourselves how our brains construct them and put them to use. However, 
here we need a theory about why, when our bodies move, the objects 
around us seem to remain in place. When first you see the three walls of 
that room, you might have represented them with a network like this: 


However, that representation is incomplete because, even before you 
entered that room, you expected it to have Jour walls—and already knew 
how to represent a typical boxlike four-walled room. Consequently, you 
"assumed by default" that its edges, corners, ceiling, and floor would he 
parts of a larger, nonmoving framework that doesn't depend on your present 
point-of view. In other words, the "reality" that we perceive is based 
on mental models in which things don't usually change their shapes or 
disappear, despite their changing appearances. We mainly react to what 
we expect—and tend to tepresent the things that we see as though they 

remain the same as we move aroimc 



RESOURCEFULNESS 

If you use the kind of larger-scale structure seen in the previous figure, 
then as you roam about that room, you can store each new observation 
in some appropriate part of that more stable framework. For example, if 
you represent that chair as near the north wall, and the door as part ok the 
south wall, then these objects will have a fixed "mental place"—regardless 
of where you were when you noticed them—and those locations will stay 
the same even when those objects are out of sight. (Of course this could 
lead to accidents, if an object was moved without your knowing it!) 

For vision, this shows how the space that surrounds us would seem to 
stay the same when we see it from different views—by linking features in 
different realms to similar roles in a larger-scale frame. 

We rarely make an entirely new idea; instead, we usually modify an 
existing one, or combine some parts of some older ones. For, before you 
make records of anything new, it is likely that you have already recalled 
some similar object or incident—so then you can copy and modify some 
structure that you already possess. This is especially useful because if you 
were to construct an entirely new mental structure, you also would have 
to construct some way to retrieve it in future rimes, as well as to connect it 
to some skills for using it. However, if that older object or incident already 
belongs to a panalogy, and you add your new concept as an additional 
leaf, then it will inherit all die techniques by which your older ideas are 
retrieved and applied. 

For example, you can think of a chair as a physical structure whose 
parts consist of a back, seat, and legs. In that physical view, the chairs legs 
support its seat, and both of these support the chair's back. You also can 
think of a chair as a way to make people feel comfortable. Thus, the chair's 
seat is designed to support one's weight, the chairs back serves to support 
ones back, and the chair's legs support one up to a height designed to help 
a person to relax. 



 THE, EMOTION MACHINE 

Similarly, you could also regard that very same chair as an item of 
personal property, or as a work of art or of carpentry—and each of those 
various contexts could lead you to represent chairs in different ways. Then, 
when your present idea of that chair makes no sense, your Critics could 
tell you to switch to a different mental realm—and if you have linked 
similar features into panalogies, that switching could work very rapidly. 

Student: How do we make those panalogies? How hard are they 
to construct and maintain? Is the talent for making them innate 
or learned? How do we learn to make use of them? Where do we 
place them in our brains? 

I suspect that we do not need to "learn" all those skills, because the architecture 
of our brains has evolved to have sttuctures that make it easy for us 
to link every fragment of knowledge wc learn to ones that we already know, 
in similar structures for other realms and for the same things seen from 
different points of view. We do all this so automatically that it seems to 
require no reasoning; however, Section 8-5 will argue that intelligent learning 
requires a good deal more machinery than was imagined in most older 
theories about psychology. 

Student: But wouldn't such links cause you to mistake what you 

see for something else that it reminds you of? You would always 

be confusing things. 

Yes, and we're constantly making those kinds of "mistakes"—but paradoxically, 
that often helps to keep us from being confused! For if you 
saw each chair as entirely new, then it would have no meaning to you. 
However, if each new chair reminds you of similar ones—then you will 
see many uses for it. 

Representing knowledge by using panalogies would have substantial 
advantages. A panalogy can serve as a way to use the very same structure to 
serve several purposes, by changing the contexts or realms of the knowledge 
entered into its analogous "slots." We've already seen how this could enable 
us to quickly switch between different meanings for the same things, and 
how each such perspective could help to overcome some deficiencies of 
the other ones. More generally, this would be a straightforward way to 
represent a great many kinds of metaphors and analogies. All this has led 


RESOURCE FITNESS 

267 

me to suggest that our brains might embody much of our cornmonsense 
knowledge in the form of panalogies/ 

If our memories mainly consist of panalogies, then most of our 
thoughts will involve ambiguities. However, this is a virtue and 
not a fault—because much of: our human resourcefulness comes 
from using analogies that result from this. 

8-4 How Do People Learn So Rapidly? 

Long ago, the philosopher Hume raised the question of why we can learn 
at all: 

David Hume 1748: "All inferences from experience suppose, as 
their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, and that 
similar powers will be conjoined with similar sensible qualities. If 
there be any suspicion that the course of nature may change, and 
that the past may be no rule for the future, all experience becomes 
useless, and can give rise to no inference or conclusion." 

In other words, learning itself can work only in a suitably uniform universe. 
But still we need to ask how learning works—and we especially 
want to know more about how human learning works, because no other 
creatures come close to us in being able to learn so much. Furthermore, we 
do this with astonishing speed, as compared to other animals-—so here 
we'll focus on the question of how a person can learn so much from seeing 
a single example.'' Here is an episode that illustrates this: 

Jack saw a dog do a certain trick, so he tried to teach that trick to 
his own pet, but jack's dog needed hundreds of lessons to learn 
it. Yet Jack learned that trick from seeing it only once. How did 
Jack so quickly learn so much—although he had only seen one 
instance of it? 

*The idea of a paralogy was suggested in Section 1-6 of Minsky 1974, and mote details 
were proposed in Chapter 25 of Minsky 1986. I don't know of any experiments to see 
if structures like these can be found in our brains. Finding them might be difficult if 
different realms have representations in far-apart regions of our brains because this would 
require long nerve connections between analogous slots of these knowledge frames. 


THE EMOTION MACIIINK 

People sometimes need long sessions of practice, but we need to explain 
those occasions in which we learn so much from a single experience. However, 
here is a theory which suggests that Jack does, indeed, need to make 
many repetitions—but he does them by using an "animal trainer" inside 
his head, and he uses this "trainer" to train other resources inside his brain, 
in much the same way that he, himself, would teach his pet! 

To do this, jack could use a process like the Difference-Engine in 
Chapter 6-3. It would begin with his description of that trick, which 
is now in his short-term memory. Then Jack's "mental animal trainer" 
would work to produce a copy of that description in some other, more 
permanent place—by repeatedly altering the new copy until the trainer 
can see no significant difference between those short-term and long-term 
memories, "We could do this by making a very small change in the process 
described in Chapter 6-3: 


To convert this to be a copying machine, we could simply design it 
to change the second description instead of the first—until the structure in 
long-term memory appeared to be the same as the one in the short-term 

7

memory.



RESOURCEFULNESS 

Of course, if Jack's description of that trick is composed of many 
smaller parts, then this cycle of changing the copy will need many repetitions.
8 So our "animal-trainer" theory about how we make new long-term 
memories does suggest that, in this respect, humans are like other animals 
and do need multiple repetitions. However, we are rarely aware of this, 
presumably because that process goes on in parts of the brain that our 
reflective thinking can't "see." 

Student: Why cant we simply remember things by making those 
short-term records more permanent—in the same places where 
they are already stored? Why should we need to copy them to 
other places in our brains? 

This is a matter of economics: out short-term memories are limited 
because they use expensive resources. For example, most persons can 
repeat a list of five or six items, but when there are ten or more items, 
we reach for a writing pad. Presumably, that capacity is limited because 
each of our fast-access "memory boxes" consists of so much specialized 
machinery that each btain includes only a few of them. So we would lose 
a precious short-term memory box each time we made its connections 
more permanent! 

It is probably no coincidence that modern computers evolved in a 
similar way: at every stage of development, fast-acting memory units were 
far more costly than slower ones. So the computer designers invented 
"caches" that use expensive, fast-acting devices only to store information 
that is likely to soon be needed again. Each modem computer has 
several such caches that work at different speeds, and the faster each is, 
the smaller it is—and presumably, this is also what happens inside our 
brains. 

This would account for the well-known fact that whatever we learn 
is first stored temporarily—and then it may take an hour or more to convert 
it into a more permanenr form.'J Thus a blow to the head can cause 
a person to lose all memory of what happened before and including that 
accident. Indeed, that "transfer to long-term memory" process sometimes 
takes a whole day or more, and may require substantial intervals of sleep. 
(See Stickgold 2000.) 

Here are a few other reasons why the formation of longer-term memories 
may have evolved to tequire so much time and processing. 


 THE F.MOT10N MACHINE 

Retrieval: After one makes a memory record, it would make no sense 
to store this away without providing some ways to retrieve it. This means 
that each record must also be made with links that will help to activate it 
when relevant (for example, by linking each new memory to some other, 
already exisring panalogy). 

Credit Assignment: A memory record of how one solved a problem 
would be unlikely to have much future use if it applied to only one situation. 
Section 8-5 will discuss some techniques we might use to extend the 
relevance of our memory records. 

The "Real-Estate"" Problem for Long-Term Memories. How could 
an "animal trainer" find room in the brain for the copy that it is trying 
to make? How could it find appropriate networks of brain cells to use 
without disrupting connections and records that one would not want to 
erase? Finding places for new memories must involve complex constraints 
and requirements, and this could be a reason as to why making permanent 
records takes so much time. 

Copying Complex Descriptions. It is easy to imagine ways to record 
a simple list of symbols or properties, but I have never seen any plausible 
schemes for how a brain could quickly make copies of structures with more 
complex connections. That is why this section proposed using a sequential, 
Difference Engine-like scheme. (Chapter 22 of Minsky 1986 suggests that 
a similar scheme must be involved in verbal communication.) 

How Does Human Learning Work? 

The word learning is useful in everyday life—but when we look closely, we 
see that it includes many ways that our brains can change themselves. To 
understand how our minds grow, we would need ideas about how people 
learn such different skills as how to build a tower or tie a shoe, or how to 
understand what a new word means, or how to guess what their friends are 
thinking about. If we tried to describe all the ways in which we learn, we'd 
find ourselves starting a very long list that includes techniques like these: 

Adding new lf—>Do-*Then rules 
Changing low-level connections 



RKSOURCEFTJTNESS 

Making new subgoals lor goals 
Choosing better search techniques 
Changing high-level descriptions 
Making new Suppressors and Censors 
Making new Selectors and Critics 
Linking older fragments of knowledge 
Making new kinds of analogies 
Making new models and virtual worlds 


As children, we not only learn particular things, but we also acquire new 
thinking techniques. However, no infant could ever invent, by itself, 
enough to develop an adult intelligence. So perhaps our most important 
skill is how we learn, not only from having our own experiences, but also 

from being told things by other people. 

8-5 Credit-Assignment 

To the optimist, the glass is half full. 
To the pessimist, the glass is half empty. 
To the engineer, the glass is twice as big as it needs to be. 


When first we met Carol in Chapter 2, she learned to use spoons for moving 
fluids. But then we asked about which aspects of her several attempts 
should get credit for her final success: 

Should her learning include which shoes she wore, or the place in 
which those events occurred, or whether the weather was cloudy 
or clear? Which of the thoughts she was thinking then should be 
recorded in what she remembers? What if she smiled while using 
that fork, but happened to frown when using that spoon? What 
keeps her from learning irrelevant rules, like "To fill a cup, it helps 
to frown"?10 

Some early ideas about how animals learn were based on schemes in which 
each reward for a success will cause a small "reinforcement" of some connections 
in the animal's brain—while every disappointment will cause a 
corresponding weakening. In simple cases, such a scheme could enable a 
brain to select the right features to recognize. However, in more complex 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

situations, such methods will not work so well to find which features are 
relevant—and then we'll need to think more reflectively. 

Some other theories about how learning works assumed that this consisted 
of making and storing new If—*Do reaction-rules. This could be 
one reason why Jack's dog in Section 8-4 needed so many repetitions: 
perhaps, each time that dog attempted that trick, it made a small change 
to some /for some Do—bur then, it only recorded that change in the case 
that it got a reward. 

Simply adding new If—*Do rules might suffice for learning how to 
do simple things—but even this may require one to make some critical 
kinds of decisions. Consider that any new If-* Do rule is likely to fail if 
the /^specifies too few details (because then that rule will be applied too 
recklessly)—or if the /^includes too many details (since then it may never 
apply again, because no two situations are ever exactly the same). The 
same applies to the Do of that rule; therefore, each new If and Do must 
be just abstract enough to make it apply to a "similar" case-—but not to 
too many dissimilar ones. Otherwise, Jack's dog might need a different 
new rule for every posture or place that it's in. All this means that those 
old "reinforcement" schemes might explain some of how certain animals 
learn, but those ideas won't help much to explain how humans leatn more 
complicated things. 

This brings us back to that question about how a person can learn so 
quickly, without doing so many repetitions. Earlier we suggested that we actually 
do many repetitions, but that these go on later inside our minds. But 
here we'll take another view in which we use higher-level processes to decide 
what to learn from each incident—when, to understand what caused your 
success, you need to reflect on your recent thoughts. Here are a few of the 
processes that making such "credit assignments" mighr involve.1' 

Choosing how to represent a situation will affect which future 
ones will seem simitar. 
Learn only the parts of your thinking that helped, and forget those 
that were irrelevant. 
Connect each new fragment of knowledge so that you can access 
it when it is relevant. 

The berrer those decisions are made, the more you will benefit from each 
experience. Indeed, the quality of our credit assignment could be impor



RESOURCEFULNESS 

tant aspects of the suitcase of traits that people call "intelligence." For 
merely recording solutions to problems will help us only to solve somewhat 
similar problems, whereas if we can record how we found those 
solutions, that could further enable us to deal with much broader classes 
of situations. 

For example, in playing a game like checkers or chess, if you should 
happen to win a game, you won't gain much by simply recording the 
moves that you made—because you re unlikely ever again to encounter 
those same situations. However, you can do better if you can learn which 
of your higher-level decisions heiped to reach diose winning positions. For 
as Allen Newell observed fifty years ago, 

Allen Newell 1955: "It is extremely doubtful whether there is 
enough information in "win, lose or draw," when referred to the 
whole play ol the game [so, for learning to be effective], each play 
of the game must yield much more information. . . , If a goal is 
achieved, its subgoals are reinforced; if not they are inhibited. . . . 
Every tactic that is created provides information about the success 
or failure of tactic search rules; every opponent's action provides 
information about success or failure of likelihood inferences and 
so on." 

Thus, when you finally achieve a goal, you should assign some credit for 
this to the higher-level method you used to divide that goal into subgoals. 
Instead of just storing solutions to problems, you can use each such expetience 
to refine the strategies that you used. 

Student: But then you'd also want to remember the strategics that led 
to those strategies—and you've started a process that never will end! 

There is no clear limit to how long one could dwell on what might have 
led to a certain success. Indeed, such realizations are sometimes delayed 
for minutes, hours, or even days (as we saw in Chapter 7-7). This suggests 
that some of our credir assignments involve extensive searches that go on 
in other parts of our minds. 

For example, we sometimes have "revelations" like "Now I see the solution 
to this," or "/ suddenly see just why that worked!" But as we saw in 
Chapter 7-7, we cannot assume that those problems were solved at just 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

those particular moments of time, since we were unaware of the unconscious 
work that had preceded them. II so, then such an event may merely 
celebrate the moment at which some Critic has said, "This has taken so 
long that it's time to stop—and to adopt the tactic already considered which, 
at this moment, would seem the best."u 

We usually make our credit assignments without much reflection, but 
sometimes one may say to oneself after completing some difficult job, 

"It was stupid of me to have wasted all that time, when I knew how to do it 
all along." To remedy this, one might be able to construct a new Critic, 
or make some change in an existing Critic that failed to remind one to 
retrieve that particular fragment of knowledge. 

However, such self-reflections often fail because one finds it harder 
to see how one found a solution than it was to solve that problem; 
this happens when we don't know enough about how our own mental 
processes work. In other words, our ability to "introspect'' is limited; 
if it were not, we'd have no need for psychologists. So if we want to 
understand how people learn, we will need more research on questions 
about what kinds of credit assignments infants can make, how children 
develop better techniques, how long such processes persist, and about 
the extent to which we can learn to control them. In Chapter 9 we will 
also discuss how our feelings of pleasure might relate to how we make 
our credit assignments. 

Transfer of Learning to Other Realms. Every teacher knows the 
frustration that comes when a child learns something to pass a test, yet 
never applies that skill to anything else. What makes certain children excel 
at "transferring" knowledge to other, different realms—whereas orhcr children 
seem to need to relearn the same ideas in each domain? 

It would be easy simply to say that some children are "more intelligent"—-
but that would not help us to explain how they use their 
experiences to make more helpful generalizations. This could be partly 
because some children are better at making and using panalogies. But also, 
those "smarter" children may have come to learn more efficiently because 
they have learned to reflect (perhaps unconsciously) about how their own 
learning processes work—and then found ways to improve those processes. 
For example, such reflections may lead to better ideas about which 
aspects of things they ought to learn. 

It seems clear that the qualities of how we learn must depend, to a 
large extent, on how well we make our credit assignments. This means 


RESOURCEFULNESS 275 

that persons who do not learn to make good credit assignments would be 
likely to show deficiencies in their ability to apply what they learn to new 
situations. This is what psychologists call "Transfer of Learning."li 

This section has argued that, to gain more from each experience, it 
would not be wise for us to remember too many details—but only those 
aspects that were relevant to our goals. Furthermore, what we learn can be 
more profound if we assign the credit for our success not only to the final 
act that has led to our failure or success—or even to the strategy that has led 
to it—but to whatever earlier choices we made rJiat selected our winning 
strategy. Our abilities to make good credit assignments could be among the 
most important ways in which we surpass our animal relatives. 

8-6 Creativity and Genius 

"The best way to have a good idea is to have lots of ideas." 
—Linus Pauling 


We admire our Einsteins, Shakespeares, and Becthovens—and many 
people insist that their accomplishments are inspired by "gifts" that 
cannot be explained. If so, then machines could never do such things 
because (at least, in that popular view) no machine could hold any such 
mysteries. 

However, when one has die fortune to meet one of those petsons 
whom we portray as "great," one finds no single, unusual trait that seems 
to account for their excellence. Instead (at least it seems to me), all that we 
find are unusual combinations of otherwise common ingredients.1'' 

They are highly proficient in their fields. (But by itself we just call 
this expertise.) 
They have more than usual self-confidence. (Hence better to 
withstand the scorn of peers.) 
They often persist where others would quit. (But others may just 
call this stubbornness.) 
They accumulate more Ways to Think. (But then they'll need better 
ways to switch.) 
They habitually think in novel ways. (But so do others, albeit less 
frequently.) 
They have better systems for self-control. (So they waste less time on 
irrelevant goals.) 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

They reject many popular myths and beliefs. (Especially about what 
cannot be achieved.) 
They tend to keep thinking more of the time. (They spend less effort 
on unproductive ideas.) 
They excel at explaining what they've done, (So their work is less 
likely to be neglected.) 
They tend to make better credit assignments. (So they learn more 
from less experience.) 

Everyone has some share of each such trait, but few develop so many of 
them to such unusually great extents. 

Citizen: Each of those traits might help to explain how regular 
people solve everyday problems. But surely there must be something 
unique about such great drinkers as Feynman, Freud, and 
Asimov. 

Here is a statistical argument against the belief that genius comes from 
singular gifts or characteristics: 

Suppose that there were, say, twenty traits that might help to 
make someone exceptional, and assume that each person has an 
even chance ro excel at each particular one. Then we'd expect only 
one in each million persons to excel at all of those twenty traits. 

However, even if that argument were right, it would shed no light on why 
those particular persons develop so many of those particular traits. For 
example, perhaps to acquire so many such qualities, a person must first 
develop some unusually good ways to learn. In any case, there is plenty of 
solid evidence that, to a significant extent, many of our mental traits are 
genetically inherited. However, I suspect that yet more important are the 
effects of fortunate mental accidents. Fot example, most children discover 
various ways to arrange their toy blocks into columns and rows—and if 
observers praise what they've done, those children may go on to refine 
those new skills. Then a certain few of them may also go on to play at 
discovering new Ways to Think. However, no outside observer can see those 
mental events, so those particular children must have learned good ways 
ro, internally, praise themselves! This means that when such a child does 
remarkable things, outsiders may see no clear cause for this-—and will 


RESOURCEFULNESS

tend to describe that child's new skills with uninformative terms like talents, 
endowments, traits, or gifts. 

The psychologist Harold G. McCurdy suggested this particular "fortunate 
accident" that could bring out exceptional traits in a child—namely, 
to have been born in an environment that includes exceptional parents. 

Harold McCurdy 1960: "The present survey of biographical 

information on a sample of twenty men of genius suggests that 

the typical development pattern includes these important aspects: 

(1) a high degree of attention focused upon the child by parents 
and other adults, expressed in intensive educational measures and 
usually, abundant love; (2) isolation from other children, especially 
outside the family; (3) a rich efflorescence of fantasy (i.e. 
creativity) as a reaction to the preceding conditions. . . . [Mass 
education in public schools has] the effect of reducing all three of 
the above factors to minimum values." 
It would also appear that outstanding thinkers must have developed some 
effective techniques that help them to otganize and apply what they learn. 
If so, then perhaps those skills of "mental management" should get some 
credit for what we perceive as the products of genius. Perhaps, once we 
understand such things, we'll be less concerned wirh teaching particular 
skills and more with teaching children how to develop more generally 
powerful mental techniques. 

Citizen: But can we really hope to understand such things? It still 

seems to me that there is something magical about the ways in 

which some people imagine completely new ideas and creations. 

Many phenomena seem magical until we find out what causes them. In 
this case, we still know so little about how our everyday thinking wotks 
that it would premature to assume that there is any essential difference 
between "conventional" and "creative" thought. Then why would we cling 
to the popular myth that our heroes have inexplicable "gifts"? Perhaps 
we're attracted to that idea because, if those achievers were bom with all 
their wonderful tricks, we would bear no blame for our own deficiencies—
nor would those artist and thinkers deserve any credit for their 
accomplishments. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

This section has mainly aimed to explain why some people get better 
ideas than others do. But what if we change that question to ask, instead, 
what could make one person become less resourceful than another one? Here 
is one process that could tend to limit the growth of ones versatility: 

The Investment Principle: If you know two different ways to achieve 
the same goal, you'll usually start with the method that you know 
best. Then, over time, that method may gain so much additional 
strength that you'll tend to use it exclusively—even if you have 
been told that the other technique is the better one. 

Thus, sometimes the obstacle to learning a new Way to Think is that 
one needs to endure the discomfort of many awkward or painful performances. 
So, one "secret of creativity" may be to develop the knack of 
enjoying that sort of unpleasantness! We'll explore this more in Chapter 9, 
when wc talk about "advenrurousness." 

Speaking of "creativity," it is easy to program a machine to spout an 
endless stream of things that never before were conceived. However, what 
distinguishes the thinkers whom we call "creative" is not how many new 
ideas they produce—nor even how novel those concepts may be—but 
how effectively they can select which new ideas to further develop. This 
means that those artists have ways to suppress (ot, better, not even to generate) 
ptoducts that have too much novelty. 

Aaron Sloman 1992: "The most important discoveries in science 
are not discoveries of new laws or theories, but the discovery of 
new ranges of possibilities, about which various laws or theories 
could be formulated. This deepens our knowledge of the 'form' 
of the world, as opposed to its contents' or its 'constraints'-—the 
laws." 

8-7 Memories and Representations 

William James 1890: "There is no property absolutely essential 
to one thing. The same property, which figures as the essence of 
a thing on one occasion, becomes a very inessential feature upon 
another." 


RES0URC3SFULNESS

Everyone can imagine things; we hear words and phrases inside our minds. 
We envision conditions that don't yet exist—and then exploit those images 
ro predict the effects of possible actions. Much of our human resourcefulness 
comes from our being able to manipulate menral representations of 
objects, events, and conceptualizations. 

But what do we mean by a representation*. 1 will use that term to talk 
about any structure inside one's brain that one can use to answer some 
questions. Of course, those answers will be useful only when your representation 
behaves enough like the subject that you are asking about. 

We sometimes use actual physical objects to represent things, as when 
we use a picture or map to help us find paths between parts of a city. 
However, to answer a question about a past event, we must use what we 
call our "memories." But what do we mean by a "memory"? Each memory 
must be some record or trace that you made at the time of some prior 
event—and, of course, you cannot record an event itself; at best, you can 
only make some records about some of the objects, ideas, and relationships 
that were involved in rhat incident—as well as how that event affected 
your mental state. For example, when you hear a statement like "Charles 
gave Joan the book," you might represent that incident with a scriptlike 
sequence ofIf—*Do—*Then rules: 


However, you also may want to represent your knowledge about 
whether that book was a gift or a loan, or whether Charles's goal was to 
ingratiate Joan, or how the actors in that scene were dressed, or the meanings 
of some of the words that they said. So, we typically make several 
different representations for any particular incident. For example, those 
records might include: 

A verbal description of that incident 
A visual simulus of the scene 
Some models of the persons involved 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Simulations of how those persons felt 

Analogies with similar incidents 

Predictions about what might happen next 

Why would your brain represent the same event in so many differenr 
ways? If each realm of thought that you engaged left an additional record 
or trace, this would enable you, later, to use multiple ways to think about 
that same incident—for example, by using verbal reasoning, or by manipulating 
mental diagrams, or by envisioning the actors' gestures and facial 
expressions. 

Today, we still know little about how our brains make those memory 
traces or how they later retrieve and "replay" them. For although today we 
know a lot about the ways in which separate brain cells behave, we know 
far less about how those cells are organized into larger structures that represent 
our memories of past events. Nor do our own reflections tell us 
much about the details of those processes; usually, the most we can say is 
simply that we "remember" some things that have happened to us. So the 
following section will suggest a few structures that our brains might use 
to represent the knowledge stored in our memories. Then we'll go on to 
speculate about how such structures might be arranged in our brains. 

Multiple Ways to Represent Knowledge 

What distinguishes us from other animals? One important difference is that 
no other animals ask questions like that! We humans seem to be almost 
unique in being able to treat ideas as though they were things or, in other 
words, to "conceptualize." 

However, to invent new concepts and put them to use, we must represent 
those new ideas in structural forms that we store in the networks 
inside our brains-—because no small fragment of knowledge can have any 
meaning unless it is part of some larger structure that has connections to 
other parts of our network of knowledge. However, it does not much matter 
how those links are embodied; rhe same computer can be made with 
wires and switches, or even with pulleys, blocks, and strings; all that matters 
is how each part changes state in response to the changes in the other 
parts to which it is connected. 

In other words, knowledge is not composed of "ideas" that exist as 
separate entities that float around in some mental world; they also need 
to be interconnected. Of course, it often is useful to think of thoughts 


RESOURCEFULNESS

and ideas as being "abstract"—and to represent them with symbols in diagrams, 
or with the sentences of written texts. Nevertheless, for a thought 
or concept to have any effect—such as to cause your hand to move a 
block, or to make your vocal tract produce a sound, or to cause you to 
think of your following thought—there must be some physical structures 
that interconnect some representations inside your brain. 

This section reviews some modern ideas that researchers have used 
for representing knowledge inside computers—as well as some that have 
not yet been tested. There is not enough room here for many details, and 
The Society of Mind says much more about the subjects of the rest of this 
section.14 

Describing Events as Stones or Scripts 

Perhaps our most familiar way to represent an incident is to recount it 
as a story or script that depicts a sequence of events in time-—that is, in 
the form of a story or a narrative. We've seen such scripts for the sentence 
"Charles gave foan the book" and for Carol's plan about how to build 
an arch. 


Charles holds book. Both hold book. Joan holds book. 


Of course, not ail processes are so linear. Most computer programs are 
mainly composed of sequential actions like these—but at some points the 
flow is interrupt by some branching Ifs, at which the script can go in several 
directions, depending on specified current conditions. Nevertheless, 
once the process is done, one can simplify and summarize it by listing only 
the path that was actually taken—as in, "I was trying to build an arch with 
my toy blocks, and I discovered that one has to build the supports before putting 
on the top"—which omits any mention of all the diversions involved 
in learning this. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Describing Structures with Semantic Networks 

Of course, each of the items named in a story or script may refer to other, 

more complex structures. For example, to understand what terms like 

Joan or book mean, the reader must already possess some structures or 
models that represent these. Whenever we need to describe more details, 
such as the relations between an object's parts, it may be better to use the 
kinds of structures we saw in Chapters 4-6 and 5-8 to represent a person 
or a physical book.1"' 


Each of these so-called "Semantic Networks" is a collection of symbols 
that are linked by labeled connection links. They are among the most 
versatile forms of representation, because each connection-link could itself 
refer to yet another type of representation. The Semantic Network in the 
figure below represents several kinds of relationships between the various 
parts of a three-block Arch. 



RESOURCEFULNESS 

Each of the links named part of, group, supports, and do not touch 
refers, in turn, to some other structure, resource, or process that one can 
use to understand more about what this Semantic Network represents. 
For example, the links that bear the label "supports" could be used to predict 
chat the top block would fall if we removed a block that supports it, 

Using Trans-Frames to Represent Actions 

To represent the effects of an action, it is convenient to use pairs of Semantic 
Networks to represent what was changed. In Chapter 5-8 we saw how 
to imagine replacing the top of an arch, by changing a single name or relationship 
at a high level of representation—instead of altering thousands of 
points to change a visual picturelike image. 


We'll use the term "Trans-Frame" to name a pair of representations 
of the conditions before and after some action was done. Then we can 
represent the effect of a sequence of actions by linking together a chain 
of Trans-Frames to form a story or narrative. We've already seen how to 
represent "Charles gave Joan the book"w\xh five such "movie frames": 


Charles holds hook. Both hold book. Joan holds book. 


THE EMOTION MACHINK 

Here is another version of this consisting of only three such representations, 
but in these each frame shows some further details. 


Using Frames to Embody Commonsense Knowledge 

I described Frames and Trans-Frames in Minsky 1974 and 1986, so I won'r 
repeat all the details here. However, here are a few important points about 
how such structures could be used. A Trans-Frame represents the effect of an 
action by describing the situations before and after that action—but it can 
also include other information about commonsense matters like these: 

Who performed the action, and why? What other things did the 

action affect? 

Where (and when) did that action begin and end? 

Was it intentional or not? What purposes was it intended to serve? 

What kinds of methods or instruments were used? 

What obstacles were overcome? What were its other side effects? 

Which resources did it engage? What was expected to happen next? 

For example, a Trans-Frame for Joan's trip from Boston to New York could 
have additional "slots" like those depicted here: 



RESOURCEFULNESS 

This Trans-Frame includes two Semantic Networks that describe the 
situations Before and After that trip was taken—but it also contains many 
other slots that contain information about when, how, and why Joan took 
that trip. But also, those slots may already come equipped to contain the 
common answers to the most common questions. In other words, the 
slots of our Frames may contain "by default" a great deal of what we call 
commonsense knowledge. 

For example, when someone says "apple," you seem to know instantly 
that a typical apple grows on a tree, is round and red, is about the size of 
a human hand, and has a certain texture, flavor, and taste—yet almost no 
time seems to elapse between hearing that word and then becoming aware 
of such things. Chapters 6 and 7 asked questions about what could enable 
your brain so quickly to retrieve so much of the commonsense knowledge 
it needs. Our theory is that this is partly because every slot of each of your 
frames has already been filled with the most common or typical information. 
Then you use this to make a good guess whenever you don't have 
additional information. 

For example, you might assume "by default" that an apple is red— 
but if you know that a certain apple is green, then you will replace "red" 
with "green" in its color slot. In other words, a typical frame describes 
a stereotype whose "default assumptions" are usually right—but which 
you can easily change whenever you meet some exceptions to them.16 


All adults know millions of items like these, and regard rhem as everyday, 
commonsense knowledge, but every child takes years to learn all the 
nuances of how their Trans-Frames behave under different conditions and 
in different realms. For example, everyone knows that, if you move a thing 
in the physical realm, then this will change the location it's in—but if you 
tell some information to your friend, then that same knowledge will be 
in two places at once. Similarly, if you heard that Charles was grasping 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

a book, you would not stop to ask why he was doing that, because you 
would assume by default that he has the most usual goal for anyone who 
would grasp anything—that is, to keep it from falling to the floor. 

This idea of "default assumptions" could help to explain how you can 
so quickly access your commonsense knowledge: as soon as you activate 
a frame, many questions that you might otherwise ask will already be 
answered before you can ask them,17 

Learning by Building "Knowledge-Lines" 

Suppose that you have just had a good idea, which helped you to solve 
a certain hard problem called P What should you learn from this experience? 
One thing you could do is to construct a new rule: //"the problem 
you face is like problem P. Then try the solution that once worked on P, 
Such a rule will help you to solve problems that closely resemble P—but 
will be less helpful with less similar problems. However, if you could make 
a recording of the Way to Think that you used to find that solution, this 
would be more likely to help in a wider range of situations. 

Of course, it would be impractical to make a copy of the entire state of 
a human mind; however, you might get most of the effect you want if you 
could, later, reactivate enough of the resources that were active at the time 
you discover that way to solve problem P. You could do this by constructing 
a new Selector that is connected so that it activates just those resources 
that were recently active. We call this kind of structure a "K-line." Such a 
K-line can act as a sort of "snapshot" of a mental state because, when you 
later activate it, this will put you into a similar state. 


Here is an analogy that illustrates how K-Iines work: 

Kenneth Haase 1968: "You want to repair a bicycle. Before you 
start, smear your hands with red paint. Then every tool you need 


RESOURCEFULNESS 

to use will end up with red marks on it. When you're done, just 
remember that 'red' means 'good for fixing bicycles.' If you use 
different colors for different jobs, some tools will end up marked 
with several colors, [ . . . ] Later, when you have some job to do, 
just activate the set of tools wirii the right color for that kind of 
job, and the resources that you've used for such jobs then become 
available." [See Chapter 8 of Minsky 1986.] 

This way for each kind of problem or job, your K-lines can fill your mind 

with ideas that might be relevant—by getting you into a mental state that 
resembles one that helped in the past to do a similar task. 

Student: I see how this new K-line could be used as a Selector for 
a new Way to Think. But how would you build a new Ctitic to 
recognize when to activate it? 

If we want to use that new K-line fot problems similar to P, then such a 
Critic should recognize some combination of features of P. 


However, if such a Critic would act only when all the features of P 
were present, then it could fail to recognize situations that were slightly 
different from P So each new Critic should only detect features that actually 
helped. 

Student: I see what you mean. Suppose that when you were fixing 
that bicycle, at some point you tried to use a tool that happened 
to make the problem worse. It wouldn't be good to paint that tool 
red because, then, later you would waste more time again. 

This suggests that when we make new Selectors and Critics—or more 
generally, whenever we learn—we should try to make sure that what we 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

learn will mainly consist of knowledge that's likely to actually help. The 
following section on credit assignment will discuss some processes that 
might help to ensure that what we learn will be relevant in future times. 

Student: Would those K-lines help you to do anything new, if 

each of them merely revisits a Way to Think that you already 

knew how to use? 

That would rarely be a problem because, when you activate a K-linc, that 
won't completely replace your present Way to Think—because that K-line 
will rurn some of your resources off and turn some set of others on, but 
many of your current resources will srill remain engaged. So now, two 
different sets of resources will be active in your mind at once: the ones 
used for your recent thoughts and the ones aroused by that memory. If 
those resources were all comparibJe, then both sets might be able to work 
together to solve the problem that you are facing. Then you could combine 
what remains of both of those sets, store them away as a new K-line 
set—and the result would be that you would have created a Selector for a 
new Way to Think. 

What would happen if too many of your current resources were incompatible 
with those that a K-line tried to activate? One strategy might be to 
give priority to the K-line's resources—but that policy could have bad side 
effects: we do not want our memories to re-create old states of mind so 
firmly that they overwhelm our present thoughts, because then we might 
lose track of our present goals or wipe out all the work that we've recently 
done. Another policy would be to give the presently active agents priority 
over the remembered ones, and yet another policy would suppress both. 

My answer is that no single policy will always work; therefore, resourceful 
people find ways to decide (using higher-level strategies) which policy 
might be best to apply in various kinds of situations. In any case, whichever 
policy is used, the resulting state of mind will almost surely be a bit 
different from any state that your mind has ever been in. Thus, every new 
situation is likely to lead to a somewhat novel Way to Think—and if you 
make a "snapshot" of that, you will have a K-line that differs from all of 
your previous ones.I8 

We also should note that our mental representations almost never 
'start from scratch" because, whenever we make a new one, we usually do 
this by linking some older ones. For example, when you understood that 


RESOURCEFULNESS 

Charles gave Joan the book, your representation of this evenr would almost 
surely refer to previous representations of Charles, Joan, and book that you 
had constructed at earlier times. So after hearing that sentence, your state 
of mind will include many resources diat those other concepts use. 

Consequently, if you tried to make a single K-line that could re-create 
that mental state, that K-line might need to be connected to hundreds 
of thousands of other resources. However, you could accomplish much 
of the same effect by making a K-line that simply connects to just those 
three older representations of Charles, Joan, and book. Then, when you 
activate this new K-line at some later date, this may be sufficient to give 
you the sense of reexperiencing the mental event that you constructed it 
to represent. 

"Charles gave Joan the book" 


K-line attached to three other K-littes, 

Connectionist and Statistical Representations 

Let's contrast two different ways to represent the commonsense idea of 
an apple—which is an edible fruit with red or yellow or green skin with a 
crisp whitish flesh and a sweet to tart taste, and comes from a native Eurasian 
tree widely cultivated in many varieties. 



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

The diagram on the left shows a Semantic Network that describes 
various features and relationships between various aspects or parts of an 
apple. The diagram on the right shows an example of what is called a 

"Connectionist Network," which also displays some aspects of an apple, but 
does not have any simple way to distinguish between different relationships; 
it only shows numbers that represent how closely those features are 
"associated." It would take too long here to explain how such networks 
are used, and the reader can see more details in Minsky 1988 and Minsky 
1991. Connectionist systems have had many practical applications, 
because they can be made to learn to recognize many important types of 
patterns-—without any need lor a person to program them. 

However, those number-based networks also have limitations that keep 
them from doing reflective thinking. One can sometimes interpret those 
numerical values as correlations or likelihoods, but, because they carry no 
other clues about what those links might signify, it can be extremely hard tor 
other resources to use that information. The rrouble is that a Connectionist 
Network must reduce every relationship to a single numerical value or 
"strength," so there remains almost no trace ol the evidence that led to it. 
For example, if you see only the number 12, you cannot tell if that number 
represents 5 plus 7, or 9 plus 3, or 27 minus 15—or whether it counts 
the people in a room or the legs of the chairs they are sitting on. In short, 
numerical representations become obstacles to using higher-level Ways to 
Think. In contrast, Semantic Networks can explicitly represent different 
kinds of relationships (because of the labels anached to each link). 

I mention all this because, although 1 played a part in inventing 
Connectionist Netwotks, I see their popularity, in recent years, as having 
retarded the search for higher-level ideas about human psychological 
machinery. In my view of that history, research on commonsense thinking 
kept advancing until about 1980, but then it was clearly recognized 
that further progress would need ways to acquire and organize millions of 
fragments of commonsense knowledge. That prospect seemed so daunting 
that most researchers decided to try, instead, to invent machines that 
could learn, by themselves, all the knowledge that they would need—in 
short, to invent new kinds of "baby-machines" like those we mentioned 
in Chapter 6-2. 

Quire a few of these learning machines did indeed learn to do some 
useful things, but none of them went on to develop higher-level reflective 
Ways to Think—and I suspect that this was mainly because they tried 


RESOURCEFULNESS

to represent knowledge in numerical terms, which made it very hard for 
them to produce expressive explanations. 

Nevertheless, I do not mean to suggest that such networks are not 
important—for as we'll see in Section 8-8, it seems safe to assume that 
many of the low-level processes in our brains must use some forms of Connectionist 
Networks. 

Micronemes for Contextual Knowledge 

We always face ambiguities. The significance of each thing that you see 
depends on the rest of your mental context. This also applies to events in 
your mind, because what they mean depends on which mental resources 
are active then.t9 In other words, no symbol or object has meaning by itself, 
because yout interpretation of it will depend on the mental context you're 
in. For example, when you hear or read the word block, you might possibly 
think that it means an obstacle to progress, a certain kind of rectangular 
object, a wooden board to chop things on, or a stand on which things in 
an auction are shown. Then which interpretation will you select? 

Such choices will depend, of course, on how your current mental context 
will dispose you to make selections from such sets of alternatives as 
these: 

Conceptual or material 

Well established or speculative 

Robust, fragile, or repairable 

Public or private 

Urban, rural, forest, or farm 

Irregular or symmetrical 

Animal, mineral, or vegetable 

Common, rare, or irreplaceable 

Indoors or outdoors 

Residence, office, theater, or car 

Color, texture, hardness, or strength 

Cooperative or competitive, etc. 

Many contextual features like these have common names, but many others 
have no such wotds, just as we have no expressions for most flavors and 
aromas, gestures and intonations, attitudes and dispositions. I have pro



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

posed to use the term "micronemes" for rhe myriad of nameless clues that 
color and shade our thoughts about things, and the figure below suggests 
some machinery through which such contextual features could affect our 
mental processes.'11 Imagine that the brain contains a bundle of thousands 
of wirelike fibers that pass through a great many other structures inside 
thar brain—so that the state of each of those micronemes can influence 
many other processes. 


On the input side, we shall assume that many of your mental 
resources—such as K-lines, Frame-slots, or lf-+Do—*Then rules—can 
alter the states of some micronemes. Then the present state of your micronemes 
could represent much of your current mental context—and as the 
states of those fibers are changed, your far-reaching bundles of micronemes 
will broadcast that information to many other mental resources, so that 
this will change some of your attitudes, outlooks, and stares of mind. 

8-8 A Hierarchy of Representations 

The sections above have briefly described several kinds of structures that 
we could use to represent various types of knowledge. However, each of 
those representation types has its own virtues and deficiencies—-so each of 
them may need other connections through which to exploit some other 
types of representations. This suggests that our brains need some larger-
scale organization for interconnecting our multiple ways to represent 
knowledge. Perhaps the simplest such arrangement would be a hierarchical 
one. 


RESOURCEFULNESS


This diagram shows one attempt to suggest how a brain might 
organize its multiple ways to represent knowledge. However, we should 
not expect to find that actual brains are arranged in such an orderly 
way. Indeed, we should not be surprised if anatomists find that different 
regions of the brain evolved somewhat different organizations to 
support mental functions in different realms—such as for maintaining 
our bodily functions, manipulating physical objects, developing social 
relationships, and for reflective and linguistic processes. Also, even if 
this diagram turned out to be a good description of how those functions 
relate to one another, some structures that appear to be neighbors in this 
picture could actually be much farther apart. Indeed, much of the mass 
of a human brain consists of bundles of nerves that interconnect regions 
at distant locations.^1 

It also seems unlikely that our representations are arranged quite so 
hierarchically. In biology, new structures usually originate as duplicate 
copies of older ones, and this often results in orderly layers. However, 
because brain cells are so peculiarly able to make connections to distant 
places, they can more easily evolve less hierarchical organizations. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

How Do We Learn New Representations;* 

From where do we obtain our ways to represent knowledge, and why do 
we find it so easy to arrange that knowledge into panalogies? Are these 
abilities installed genetically into our infant memory systems, or do we 
learn them individually from our personal experiences? These questions 
suggest a more basic one: how do we manage to learn at all? As Immanuel 
Kant pointed out long ago, learning to learn is one of the things that we 
cannot learn entirely from experience! 

Immanuel Kant 1787: "That all our knowledge begins with 
experience there can be no doubt. For how is it possible that the 
faculty of cognition should be awakened into exercise otherwise 
than by means of objects which affect our senses, and partly of 
themselves produce representations, partly rouse our powers of 
understanding into activity, to compare, to connect, or to separate 
these—and so to convert the raw material of our sensations into 
a knowledge of objects? [...... j But, though all our knowledge 
begins with experience, it by no means follows that it all arises out 
of experience. For, on the contrary, it is quite possible that our 
empirical knowledge is a combinarion of rhat which we receive 
through impressions, and [additional knowledge] altogether independent 
of experience . . . which the faculty of cognition supplies 
from itself, sensory impressions giving merely the occasion. 

So, although sensations give us "occasions" to learn, this cannot be what 
makes us "able" to learn, because we first must have the additional 
knowledge that our brains would need, as Kant has said, to "produce representations" 
and then "to connect11 them.22 Such additional knowledge 
would also include inborn ways to recognize correlations and other relationships 
among sensations. I suspect that, in the case of physical objects, 
our brains are already innately endowed with machinery to help us "to 
compare, to connect, or to separate" objects so that we can represent them 
as existing in space. 

All this leads me to suspect that we must be born with primitive forms 
of structures like K-lines, Frames, and Semantic Networks—so that no 
infant needs to wholly invent the kinds of representations that we depicted 
above. However, I doubt that we're born with those structures complete, 


KKSOIKCERJLNESS 

so it still requires some effort and time for us to refine those primitive 
representations into their more adult forms. 1 hope that there will soon be 
more research on how those developmental processes work. 

Could any person ever invent a totally new kind of representation? 
Such an event must be quite rare because no type of representation would 
be useful without some effective skills for working with it—-and a new 
set of such skills would take time to grow. Also, no fragment of knowledge 
could be of much use unless it is represented in a familiar way. For 
reasons like these, it makes sense to conjecture that most of our adult represenrations 
come either from refining our primitive ones, or by acquiring 
them from our culture. However, once a person has learned to use several 
different representations, then that person might be more able to invent 
new ones. This could be what distinguishes the work of those exceptional 
writers, artists, inventors, and scientists who repeatedly discover new and 
useful ways to represent things. 

How should a brain proceed to select which representation to use? As 
we have emphasized several times, each particular kind of description has 
virtues and deficiencies. Therefore, it makes more sense to ask, "Which 
methods might work for the problem I'm facing—and which representations 
are likely to work well with those methods?" 

Most computer programs still, today, can do only one particular kind of 
task, using only a single kind of representation—whereas our human brains 
accumulate multiple ways to describe each of: the Types of Problems we face. 
However, this means that we also need to learn ways to decide which technique 
ro use in each situation—and it also means that we need to learn how 
to switch to another alternative whenever the method we're using fails. 

Whirh Representations to Use lor Which Purposes? 

When programmers set out to develop a program, they usually start by 
selecting a way to represent the knowledge their program will need. But 
each representation works well only in certain realms, and none works 
well in every domain. Yet we frequently hear discussions like this about 
what is the best way to represent knowledge: 

Mathematician: It is always best to express things with logic. 
Connectionist: No, logic is far too inflexible to represent commonsense 
knowledge. Instead, you ought to use Connectionist Networks. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Linguist: No, because Connectionist Nets are even more rigid. They 
represent things in numerical ways that are hard to convert to 
useful abstractions. Instead, why not simply use everyday language—
with its unrivaled expressiveness. 

Conceptualise No, language is much too ambiguous. You should use 
Semantic Networks instead—in which ideas get connected by 
definite concepts! 

Statistician: Those linkages are too definite, and don't express the 
uncertainties we face, so you need to use probabilities. 

Mathematician: All such informal schemes are so unconstrained that 
they can be self-contradictory. Only logic can ensure us against 
those circular inconsistencies. 

This shows that it makes no sense to seek a single best way to represent 
knowledge—because each particular form of expression also brings its own 
particular limitations. For example, logic-based systems are very precise, but 
they make it hard to do reasoning with analogies. Similarly, statistical systems 
are useful for making predictions, but do nor serve well to represent 
the reasons why those predictions are sometimes correct. It was recognized 
even in ancient times that we must represent things in multiple ways: 

"[One person might describe a house] as 'a shelter against destruction 
by wind, rain, and heat,' while another might describe it as 
'stones, bricks, and timbers'; but there is a third possible description 
which would say that it was that form in that material with 
that purpose or end. Which, then, among these is entitled to be 
regarded as rhe genuine physicist? The one who confines himself 
to the material description, or the one who restricts himself to 
the functional description? Is it not rather the one who combines 
both in a single formula?" 

—Aristotle, in On the Soul 

However, sometimes it may be better not to combine those multiple representations. 


Richard Feynman 1965: "Psychologically we must keep all the 
theories in our heads, and every theoretical physicist who is any 
good knows six or seven different theoretical representations for 


RESOURCEFULNESS

exactly the same physics. He knows that they arc ail equivalent, 
and that nobody is ever going to be able to decide which one is 
right at that level, but he keeps them in his head, hoping that they 
will give him difTerenr ideas for guessing." 

The key word here is guessing, because each such theory has virtues and 
faults, and no single representation will be best lor every predicament 
that we might lace. So much of our human resourcefulness comes from 
having multiple ways to describe the same situations—-so that each one of 
those different perspectives may help us to get around the deficiencies of 
the other ones. How could a person know when and how to choose any 
particular representation? There are several suggestions about this in my 
essay on Causal Diversity in Minsky 1992. 


9 


THE SELF 


Each one of us contains a set 
Of persons each will be: 
Oh, how I wish my own next self 
Would take the place of me! 
—Theodore Melnechuk 

What makes each human being unique? No other species of animal has 
such diverse individuals; each person exhibits a different set of appearances 
and abilities. Some of those traits are inherited, and some come from each 
person's experiences—but in every case, we each end up with different 
characteristics. We sometimes use "Self" for the features and traits that 
distinguish each person from everyone else. 

Daniel Dennett 1991: "The strangest and most wonderful constructions 
in the whole animal world are the amazing, intricate 
constructions made by the primate Homo sapiens. Each normal 
individual of rhis species makes a self. Out of its btain it spins a 
web of words and deeds, and, like the other creatures, it doesn't 
have to know what it's doing; it just does it. This web protects it, 
just like the snail's shell. .. . As such, it plays a singularly important 
role in the ongoing cognirive economy of that living body, 
because, of all the things in the environment an active body must 
make mental models of, none is more crucial than the model the 
agent has of itself." 


THE SELF 299 


However, we also use Self in a sense that suggests that we are controlled 
by powerful beings inside ourselves, who want and feel and think 
for us, and make our important decisions for us. We call these our Selves or 
Identities—and see them as staying the same over time, regardless of what 
may happen to us. Sometimes we even envision that Self as a minuscule 
person inside the mind; this is sometimes called a "homunculus''(A similar 
premise was prevalent before the dawn of modern genetics: it claimed that 
every sperm already contained a perfectly formed little personage.) 


Daniel Dennett 1978: "A homunculus (from Latin, 'little man') is 
a miniature adult held to inhabit the brain , , , who perceives all 
the inputs to the sense organs and initiates all the commands to 
the muscles. Any theory that posits such an internal agent risks an 
infinite regress . . . since we can ask whether there is a little man 
in the little man's head, responsible for his perception and action, 
and so on."1 

What attracts us to the queer idea that we can think or feel only with the 
help of those Selves inside our minds? Chapters 1 and 4 suggested that this 
concept helps to keep us from wasting time on difficult questions about 
our minds. For example, if you wondet how your vision works, the Single-
Self view gives the answer, "Your Self simply peers out though your eyes." 
If you ask about how your memory works, you get the reply, "Your Self 
knows how to recollect whatever might be relevant. "And if you wonder what 
guides you rhrough your life, it tells you that your Self supplies you with 
all your wishes, hopes, and goals—and then solves all of your problems lor 
you. Thus, the Single-Self view diverts you from asking about how your 
mental processes work. Instead, it leads you to ask questions like these: 


THKKMOTIOiN MACHINE 

Is an infant born with anything like what an adult would call a 
"Self"? Some would insist on answering with, "Yes, infants are 
persons just like us—except that they don't yet know so much." 
But others would take an opposite view: "An infant begins with 
almost no intellect, and developing one takes a sizable time," 

Does your Self have a special location in space? Most "Western" 
thinkers might answer yes—and tend to locate it inside their 
heads, somewhere not for behind their eyes. However, I've heard 
that some other cultures situate Selves between the belly and 
chest. 

Which of your goals and belief are your "genuine" ones? The Single-
Self view suggests that some of your intentions and values are 
'authentic" and "sincere"—whereas the models of mind discussed 
in this book leave more room for conflicting views. 

Does your Self stay the same throughout your life? We each have a 
sense of remaining the same, regardless of what may happen to 
us. Does this mean that some part of us is more permanent than 
our bodies and our memories? 

Does your Self survive the death of your brain? Different answers 
to that may please or distress us, but they would not help us to 
understand ourselves. 

Each such question uses words like self, we, and us in a somewhat different 
sense—and this chapter will argue that this is because, whenever we try to 
understand ourselves, we may need to use multiple views of ourselves. 

Whenever you think about your "Self" you are switching among 
a network of models, each of which may help to answer questions 
about different aspects of what you are. 

Here, as we said in Chapter 4-3, were using the word model to mean a 
mental representation that can help us to answer some questions about 
some other, more complex thing or idea. For example, some of our models 
are based on simplistic ideas, like "All our actions are based on the will to 
survive,"'or "We always like pleasure more than pain," while some other Self-
models are far more complex. We develop these multiple theories because 
each of them helps to represent certain aspects of ourselves, but is likely to 
give some wrong answers about other questions about ourselves. 


THE SELF 301 


Citizen: Why should a person want more than one model? Would 
it not be better to combine them into a single, more comprehensive 
one? 

In the past, there were many attempts to make "unified" theories of psychology. 
However, this chapter will suggest some reasons why none of 
those theories worked well by itself, and why we may need to keep switching 
among different views of ourselves. 

Jctry Fodor 1998: "If there is a community of computers living in 
my head, there had also better be somebody who is in charge; and, 
by God, it had better be Me." 

"1 have been reading my old poems, and they were written by 
somebody else. Yet I am that selfsame person; or, if I am not, who 
is? If no one is, when did he die-—-when he finished this poem, or 
that one, or the next day, or the end of that month?" 

— Cosma RohilU Shalizi 
9-1 How Do We Represent Ourselves? 

"O wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us 
To see oursels as niters see us!" 
—Robert Burns 


How do people construct their Self-models? Well start by asking simpler 
questions about how we describe our acquaintances. Thus, when Charles 
tries to think about his friend Joan, he might begin by describing some of 
het chatacteristics. These could include his ideas about 

The appearance of Joan's body and face 
The range and qualities of her abilities 
Her motives, goals, aversions, and tastes 
The ways in which she is disposed to behave 
Her various roles in the social world 


However, when Charles thinks about Joan in different realms, his descriptions 
ol her may not all agree. For example, his view ol Joan as a person at 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

work is that she is helpful and competent, but tends to undervalue herself; 
however, in social settings he sees her as selfish and overrating herself. 
What could lead Charles to make such different models? Perhaps his first 
representation of Joan served well to predict het social behaviors, but that 
model did not well describe her business self. Then, when he changed 
that description to apply to that business realm, ir made new mistakes in 
the contexts where it had formerly worked. Eventually, he found that he 
had to make separate models of Joan to describe her behaviors in various 
roles. 

Physicist: Perhaps Charles should have tried harder to construct 

one single, unified model of Joan. 

This would not be feasible, because each of a person's mental realms 
may need different kinds of representations. Indeed, whenever a subject 
becomes important to us, we tend to build multiple models for it—and 
this ever-increasing diversity must surely be a principal source of our 
human resourcefulness. 

To more clearly see the need for multiple models, we'll turn to a simpler 
situation: suppose that you find that your car won't start. Then, to 
diagnose what might be wrong, you will need to switch among several 
different views of your car: 

If the key is stuck, or the brake won't release, you must think in 
terms of mechanical parts. 

If the starter won't turn, or if there is no spark, you must think in 
terms of electrical circuits. 

If you've run out of gas, or the air intake's blocked, you need a model 
of how your car burns fuel. 

It is the same in every domain; to answer different types of questions, we 
often need different kinds of representations. For example, if you wish 
to study psychology, your teachers will make you rake courses in at least 
a dozen subjects, such as neuropsychology, neuroanatomy, personality, 
perception, physiology, pharmacology, social psychology, cognitive psychology, 
mental health, child development, learning theories, language 


THKSELF 303 


and speech, and so on. Each of those subjects uses different models to 
describe different aspects of the human mind. 

Similarly, to learn physics, you would need to study subjects called 
classical mechanics; thermodynamics; vector, matrix and tensor calculus; 
electromagnetic waves and fields; quantum mechanics; physical optics; 
solid state physics; fluid mechanics; theory of groups, and relativity. Each 
of those subjects has its own ways to desctibe the events that occur in the 
physical world. 

Student: I thought that physicists seek to find a single model or 

"grand unified theory" to explain all phenomena in terms of some 

very small number of general laws. 

Those "unified theories of physics" may be grand, indeed—but whenever 
we deal with complex subjects like physics or psychology, we find ourselves 
forced to split those domains into "specialties" that use different 
kinds of representations to answer different kinds of questions. Indeed, a 
major part of education is involved with learning when and how to switch 
among different representations. 

Returning to Charles's ideas about Joan, these will also include some 
models of Joan's own views about herself. For example, Charles might 
suspect that Joan is displeased with her own appearance (because she is 
constantly trying to change it), and he also makes models of how Joan 
might think about herself in realms like these. 

Joan's ideas about her own ideals 

Her ideas about her abilities 

Her beliefs about her own ambitions 

Her views about how she behaves 

How she envisions her social roles 

Joan would probably disagree with some of Charles's views about her, but 
this may not make him change his opinion, because he knows that the 
models that people make of their friends are frequently better than 
the models that people make of themselves, 

"Others often better express myself." 
—Kevin Solvay1 



THKKMOTION MACI-UINK 

We Each Make Multiple Models of Ourselves 

Greg Egan 1998: "But even as these ordinary thoughts and perceptions 
flowed unimpeded, a new kind of question seemed to 
spin through the black space behind them all. Who is thinking 
this? Who is seeing these stars, and citizens? Who is wondering 
about these thoughts, and these sights? And the reply came back, 
not just in words, but in the answering hum of the one symbol 
among the thousands that reached out to claim all the rest: Not to 
mirror every thought, but to bind them. To hold them together, 
like skin. Who is thinking this? I am," 

We've discussed a few models that Charles might use when he thinks about 
his friend, Joan. But what kinds of models might people use when they try 
to think about themselves? Perhaps our most common self-model begins 
(see Chapter 4-5) by representing a person as having two parts—namely, 
a "body" and a "mind." 


A TWO-PART SELF-MODE.. 

That "body-mind" division soon grows into a structure that describes 
more of one's physical features and parts. Similarly, that part called "mind" 
will divide into a host of parts that try to depict one's various mental abilities. 



THE SELF 305 

Each of the models that one makes of oneself will serve well only in some 
situations, so one ends up with different self-portraits in which one has different 
abilities, values, and social roles. So when we think about ourselves, 
we'll usually need to keep switching among those multiple representations 
of ourselves. 


If you tried to represent all those perspectives at once, your model 
would soon become too complex to use; in each of those realms we portray 
ourselves with somewhat different autobiographies, each based on using 
di fife rent aims, ideals, and interpretations of the same ideas and events. Nevertheless, 
as Daniel Dennett suggests, we are rarely inclined to recognize 
this, so each of us constructs a myth of having—or being—a Single Self. 

Daniel Dennett 1992b: "We are all virtuoso novelists, who find 
ourselves engaged in all sorts of behaviour, and we always try 
to put the best 'faces' on if we can. We try to make all of our 
material cohere into a single good story. And that story is our 
autobiography. The chief fictional character at the centre of that 
autobiography is one's self." 

Multiple Subpersonalities 

"For there is nor a single human being . . . who is so conveniently 
simple that his being can be explained as the sum of two or three 
principal elements. . . . Harry consists of a hundred or a thousand 
selves [but] it appears to be an inborn and imperative need of all 
men to regard the self as a unit. . , , Even the best of us shares the 
delusion." 

—Herman Hesse, in Steppenwolf 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

When Joan is with a group of her friends, she regards herself to be a sociable 
person. But when surrounded by strangers, she sees herself as anxious, 
reclusive, and insecure. For as we said in Chapter 4-8, each person makes 
many different Self-models to use in each of many contexts and realms. 
Thus Joan's mind abounds with varied Self-models-—-Joans past, Joans present, 
and future Joans; some represent remnants of previous Joans, while 
others describe what she hopes to become; there are sexual Joans and social 
Joans, athletic and mathematical Joans, musical and political Joans, and 
various kinds of professional Joans. 

Whenever these "subpersonalities" are actively playing their different 
roles, each of them may have some control over different sets of goals and 
skills—so that each has a somewhat different Way to Think. However, they 
will all need common access to many of the persons resources and bodies 
of commonsense knowledge. This means that those subpersonalities will 
frequently need to compete for control of some higher-level processes. 

For example, suppose that Joan is working at her professional job, but 
suddenly some social part of her mind reminds her of a time when she was 
trapped in an awkward relationship. She tries to shake off those memories, 
only to find herself thinking in childish ways about how her parents would 
view her behavior—or she might find that she is regarding herself as a partner 
in a business, or as a person who likes to do research, a member of a family, a 
person involved in a love affair, or as a person who has a pain in her knee. 

In the course of such trains of everyday thinking, we frequently switch 
between different Self-models, whose various outlooks may not be consistent, 
because we use them for different purposes. So when one needs to 
make a decision, the result will partly depend upon which of one's subpersonalities 
is active then. Joan's Business Selfmight be inclined to choose the 
option that seems more profitable; her Ethical Self 'might select an option 
that better conforms with her ideals; her Social Self might want to select 
the one that would most please her friends. For example, when we identify 
ourselves as members of a social group, then we can share its triumphs 
and failures with pride and shame—whereas, when one is involved with a 
business, one may feel obliged to try to suppress such sentiments. Thus, as 
we said in Chapter 1, each major change in emotional state may display a 
different sub personality: 

When a person you know has fallen in love, it's almost as though 
someone new has emerged—a person who thinks in other ways, 


THE SELF 307 


with altered goals and purposes. It's almost as though a switch had 
been thrown, and a different program has started to run. 

Whenever we switch among subpersonallties, we are likely to change our 
Ways to Think—but because the context remains the same, we will still 
maintain some of the same priorities, goals, and inhibitions, as well as 
some contents of short-term memories, and of our currently active mental 
Critics. 

However, some such changes may be larger, and you often hear 
sensational stories about persons who switch between totally different 
personalities. But while such extremes are exceedingly rare, everyone 
undergoes changes of mood in which one exhibits somewhat different sets 
of intentions, behaviors, and traits. Then, whether those shirts are persistent 
or brief, the subpersonality that is now in control may activate a set 
of views and goals for you, which, for the moment, you may believe to be 
the views and goals of the "genuine" You. 

The Sense of Personal Identity 

Augustine: "Ofwhat nature am I? A life various, manifold, and vast. 
Behold in the numberless halls and caves, in the countless fields 
and dens and caverns of my memory, full without measure of numberless 
kinds of things—present there either through images as all 
bodies are; or present in the things themselves as are our thoughts; 
or by some notion or observation as our emotions are, which the 
memory rerains though the mind feels them no longer... " 

It sometimes makes sense to think of your Self as a permanent, unchanging 
entity. But to what extent are you the same as you were ten minutes 
ago? Or are you like the proverbial knife that has had both its handle and 
blade replaced? You are certainly not like die text of a bound, printed book 
whose "contents" don't change from one day to the next. Nevertheless, 
enough of your knowledge remains the same—and different enough from 
anyone else's—that one can argue that our Identities are mainly what's in 
our memories. 

"A man is often willing to say that this is the same person who 
did something in the past, not on the basis of knowing that it 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

is the same body but on a quite different basis—that the person 
recounts the past situation with great accuracy, exhibits similar 
persona] reactions, and displays the same skills." 

—Encyclopaedia Britannics 

However, that sense of identity can fade when we change our ways to 
interpret our older memories, 

William James 1890: "When the continuity is no longer felt,] the 
sense of personal identity goes too. We hear from our parents various 
anecdotes about our infant years, but we do not appropriate 
them as we do our own memories. Those breaches of decorum 
awaken no blush, those bright sayings no self-complacency. That 
child is a foreign creature with which our present self is no more 
identified in feeling than it is with some stranger's living child 
today. Why? Partly because great ti me-gaps break up all these early 
years—we cannot ascend to them by continuous memories; and 
partly because no representation of how the child felt comes up 
with the stories. .. . It is the same with certain of our dimly recollected 
experiences. We hardly know whether to appropriate them 
or to disown them as fancies, or things read or heard and not lived 
through..,. The feelings that accompanied them are so lacking in 
the recall, that no judgment of identity can be decisively cast." 

A century later, another description ol what we might mean when we talk 
of our Selves: 

Daniel Dennett 1991: "Our fundamental tactic of self-protection, 
sell-control, and sell-definition is not building dams or spinning 
webs, but telling stories—and more particularly concocting and 
controlling the story we tell others—and ourselves—about who 
we are,... And finally, we, (unlikeprofessional human storytellers) 
do not consciously and deliberately figure out what narratives to 
tell and how to tell them; like spider webs, our tales are spun by 
us; our human consciousness, and our narrative selfhood, is their 
product, not their source. . . . These strings or streams of narrative 
issue forth as if from a single source—not just in the obvious 
physical sense of flowing from just one mouth, or one pencil or 


THE SELF 309 

pen, but in a more subtle sense: their effect on any audience or 
readers is to encourage them to (try to) posit a unified agenr whose 
words they are, about whom they are: in short, to posit what I call 
a 'center of narrative gravity.'" 

In other words, Dennett portrays our conceptions of ourselves as like col


lections of drafts of self-portraits or stories that are constantly being edited 

by diverse assortments of processes. But then, what could you mean when 

you speak of yourself as remaining the same? Of course, that depends on 

how you're describing yourself—so, instead of asking about your Identity, 

perhaps you should ask, "Which of my models of myself best serves my present 

purposes?" In any case, we should ask ourselves what compels us to think of 
ourselves as Selves—and here is a simplistic theory of this: whatever happens, 
we're prone to ask ourselves who or what was responsible—because 
our representations force us to fill the "caused-by" slots that we mentioned 
in Chapter 8-7. This leads us to find explanations thar frequently help 
us to predict and control not only what happens in the world, but also 
what happens in our minds. Thus we often find ourselves wondering what 
caused us to act in a certain way or led us to make a particular choice. 

However, when you fail to find a plausible cause, that slor-filling hunger 
may lead you to imagine a cause that doesn't exist—such as the "I" in 
'1 just got a good idea." For if your frame-default machinery compels you 
to find some single cause for everything that you ever do—then that entity 
needs a name. You call it "me." I call it "you." 

9-2 Personality Traits 

Alfred Korzybski 1933: "Whatever you say something is, it is not." 

If you asked Joan to describe herself, she might say something like this: 

Joan: "I think of myself as disciplined, honest, and idealistic. But 
because I am awkward at being sociable, I try to compensate by 
trying to be attentive and friendly, and when that fails, by being 
attracrive." 

Similarly, if you were ro ask Charles to describe his friend Joan, he might 
declare that she is helpful, tidy, and competent, but somewhat lacking 


THE EMOTION MACHIMF 

in self-confidence. Such descriptions arc filled with everyday words that 
name what we call "character traits" or "characteristics"—such as disciplined, 
honest, attentive, and friendly. But what could make it possible for 
someone to describe a person at all? Why should minds so complex as ours 
show any clear-cut characteristics? Why, for example, should anyone tend 
w be usually near or usually sloppy—rather than tidy about some things 
but not about others? Why should personal traits exist at all? Here are some 
possible causes for the appearance of such uniformities: 

Inborn Characteristics. One reason why people exhihit ttaits is that 
each person is born with different sets of genes that lead to particular ways 
to behave. 

Learned Characteristics. Each person also comes to learn individual 
goals and priorities that influence when various resources get engaged—as 
when to become angry or afraid—-so that some individuals may tend more 
than others to become belligerent or diffident. 

Investment Principle. Once we learn an effective way to do some job, 
we'll resist learning other ways to do it—-because new methods are usually 
harder to use until we become proficient at them. So as our oldet procedures 
gain strength, it gets harder for new ones to compete with them. 

Archetypes and Self-Ideals. Every culture comes with myths that describe 
beings endowed with well-defined traits. Few of us can prevenr ourselves 
from becoming arrached to those heroes and villains—and this makes us try 
to change ourselves, to make those imagined traits become real. 

Self-Control. It is hard to achieve any difficult goal—or to carry out any 
long-range plan——unless you can make yourself persist at it. The following 
section will suggest that, to keep ourselves from constantly changing our 
goals and other priorities, our cultures teach us to train ourselves to become 
more "self-predictable," by constraining the ways in which we behave. 

In any case, although our trait-based descriptions arc frequently wrong 
and always incomplete, they help to make things seem simpler and more 
understandable. Thus, it is easy to say that a person is honest and tidy-—as 
opposed to being deceitful and sloppy—no matter that no person always 
tells the truth, or keeps everything perfectly neat. It saves a great deal of 
effort and time to see people or things as stereotypes. 


THE SELF 311 


However, the concept of traits can be treacherous because, even when 
we suspect that those attributions are wrong, they may still continue 
co influence us. Here is a common example of this: suppose that some 
stranger you've never met were to take your hand, look into your eyes, and 
then report this impression of you: 

"Some of your aspirations tend to be unrealistic. At times you are 
extroverted, affable, sociable, while at other times you are introverted, 
wary, and reserved. You have found it unwise to be too 
candid in revealing yourself ro orhers. You are an independent 
thinker and do not accept others' opinions without good evidence. 
You prefer a certain amount of change and variety, and become 
dissatisfied when hemmed in by restricrions and limitations. 

"At times you have serious doubts as to whether you made the 
right decision or did the right thing. Disciplined and controlled 
on the outside, you tend to be anxious and insecure inside. Your 
sexual adjustment has presented some problems for you. You have 
a great deal of unused capacity, which you have not turned to your 
advantage. You have a tendency to be critical of yourself, but have 
a strong need lor other people to like and to admire you."3 

Many people are amazed that a stranger could see so deeply inside of 
them—yet every one of those statements applies, to some extent, to just 
about everyone! Just look at the adjectives in that horoscope: affable, 
anxious, controlled, disciplined, extroverted, frank, independent, insecure, 
introverted, proud, reserved, self-critical, self-revealing, sociable, unrealistic, 
wary. Everyone has concerns with regard to each of those characteristics, 
so few of us can help but feel that each such prediction applies to us. 

Thus, millions of people have been entranced by the prophecies of so-
called psychics, fortune-tellers, and astrologers—even when their forecasts 
turn out no better than random chance would predict. (See Carlson 1985) 
One reason could be that we trust those "seers" more than we trust ourselves, 
because they appear to be "reliable authorities." Another possible 
cause could be that we tend to believe that we already resemble the persons 
we wish to be like—and fortune-tellers excel at guessing what their clients 
would like to hear. However, those predictions may often ring true simply 
because we each maintain so many Self-modeis that almost any statement 
about ourselves will agree with at least some of those models. 


THE EMOTION MACHINK 

Seif-Control 

It is hard to achieve any difficult goals unless, at least to some extent, you 
can make yourself persist at it. You would never complete any long-range 
plans if, whatever you tried, you kept "changing your mind." However, you 
cannot simply "decide" to persist, because many kinds of ideas and events 
may later affect your priorities. Consequently, we each must develop ways 
to impose less breakable constraints on ourselves. In other words, we need 
to make ourselves predictable. 

You see examples of this in how you and others construct your social 
relationships. Whenever you expect help from a friend, you assume that, at 
least to some extent, that person's behavior will be predictable. Similarly, to 
carry out a plan of your own, you must be abie to "depend on yourself"—and 
so again, to that extent, you must make yourself predictable. Our cultures 
help us to acquire such skills by teaching us to respect such traits as commitment 
and consistency. For if you come to admire such traits, you may make 
it your goal to train yourself to behave in those ways. 

Citizen: Might not such restrictions cause you to pay the price of 

losing your spontaneity and creativity? 

Artist: Creativity does not result from lack of constraints, but 
comes from discovering appropriate ones. Our best new ideas 
are the ones that lie just beyond the borders we wish to extend. 
An expression like "skdugbewlrkj" may be totally new, but would 
have no value unless it connects with other things that you already 
know. 

In any case, it is always hard to make yourself do things that do not interest 
you—because, unless you have enough self-control, the "rest of your 
mind" will find more attractive alternatives. Chapter 4-7 showed how we 
sometimes control ourselves by offering threats or bribes to ourselves in 
the form of self-incentives, like, "I'll be ashamedof myself if I give in to this," 
or 'Til be proud if I can accomplish this." To do this, you need some knowledge 
about which of those methods will work on yourself, bur generally, it 
seems to me, the tricks that we use for self-control are very much like the 
ones that we use to influence our acquaintances. 

Also, we often control ourselves by exploiting things in the physical 
world. To stave off sleep, you can pinch yourself, or take a deep breath— 


THE SELF 313 


or ingest the right amount of some stimulant. Or you can move to a more 
exciting place, or indulge in strenuous exercise. All those activities can 
keep you awake by exploiting your environment. Another trick that you 
can use is to try to change your emotional state by assuming various postures 
or facial expressions: these seem peculiarly effective because they are 
likely to influence you as much as they do your audience. 

But why must you use such devious tricks to select and control your 
Ways to Think—instead of just choosing to do what you want to do? As 
we said at the end of Chapter 3, directness would be too dangerous. You 
would probably die if one part of your mind could take over control of all 
the rest, and our species would soon become extinct if we could ignore the 
demands of hunger, pain, or sex. Accordingly, our systems evolved so that 
in emergencies, our instincts could dislodge our fantasies. 

Furthermore, every culture develops ways to help its members constrain 
themselves. For example, every game that our children play helps 
train them to invent and get into new mental states that will help them 
obey the rules of that game. In effect, each such game is a virtual world 
that we use for teaching ourselves to behave in certain specified ways. 

Self-control is no simple skill, and many of us spend much of our 
lives seeking ways to make our minds "behave." This suggests yet another 
meaning for Self; we sometimes use it as a suitcase-word for all the methods 
we use to control ourselves. 

Dumbbell Ideas and Dispositions 

There are two rules lor success in life. 
First, never tell anyone all that you know, 
—Anonymous 


Why do we find it so easy to say that a person is reclusive and shy, as 
opposed to being sociable—or that someone tends to be placid and calm, 
instead of impulsive and excitable? More generally, why do we find it so 
easy to make such two-part distinctions for other aspects of our personalities—
as when we group our tempers, emotions, moods, and traits into 
pairs that we regard as opposites? 



THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Solitary vs. Sociable 
Tranquil vs. Agitated 
Forthright vs. Devious 
Audacious vs. Cowardly 
Dominant vs. Submissive 
Careless vs. Meticulous 
Cheerful vs. Cranky 
Joyous vs. Sorrowful 


We see similar "dumbbell" thinking at work when people try to describe 
things in terms of opposing pairs of forces, spirits, or principles. Of course, 
all those distinctions are flawed; Sorrow is not the mere absence of Joy, 
nor is Agitation the absence of Tranquility. Nevertheless, we're all prone 
to divide many aspects of our minds into pairs with seemingly opposite 
qualities. An example of this is the popular myth that each person has two 
bask ways to think—that are embodied in opposite sides of the brain. 
In earlier times, those two halves of the brain were thought to be almost 
identical. But in the mid-twentieth century, when surgeons could cut 
the connections between those halves, some significant differences were 
observed, and this revived many views of the mind as a place for conflicts 
between pairs of antagonists like these: 

Left vs. Right 
Thought vs. Feeling 
Rational vs. Intuitive 
Logical vs. Analogical 
Intellectual vs. Emotional 
Conscious vs. Unconscious 
Quantitative vs. Qualitative 
Deliberate vs. Spontaneous 
Literal vs. Metaphorical 
Reductionist vs. Holistic 
Scientific vs. Artistic 
Serial vs. Parallel 


But how could so many such distinctions be embodied in the same two 
halves of the very same brain? The answer is that this is largely a myth, 
because each of those mental activities involves the use of machinery 


THE SELF 315 


located in both of those halves ol the brain. However, there also is some 
truth to that myth; our brains begin as highly symmetrical but then, one 
side develops more machinery for language-based activities, while the 
other side develops more visual and spatial abilities. However, I suspect 
that these differences might partly result from some process in which the 
so-called "dominant" side develops more reflective thinking, whereas the 
other side remains more reactive and less deliberative. As evidence for this, 
Battro 2000 appears to have shown that a single half brain can do both. 

Accordingly, I am inclined to conjecture that these differences might 
result from a process in which one side of the brain comes to develop 
substantially better "management skills." Of course, this could happen 
on both sides at once-—but many conflicts would soon arise if one had to 
obey two masters at once. However, as soon as one side begins to excel at 
suppressing impulses that come from the other side, that first one could 
then become "dominant," while the other one might slow down in developing 
abilities to ptoduce and pursue higher-level plans and goals. The 
result would be that the nondominant side would appear to be more 
childish and less mature because of having fewer administrative skills. It 
might need only a smalt genetic bias to determine which side of the brain 
eventually wins the prize of having more influence at the top. 

Here are some other possible reasons why people like two-part distinctions 
so much: 

Many tilings seem to come in opposing pairs. Generally, it is difficult 
for us to distinguish what something "is" without contrasting it with 
what it is not, and this makes us tend to see things in terms of their 
possible opposites. For example, it often makes sense to classify physical 
objects as large or small, or as heavy or light, or as coldoi hot 

However, a young child might tell you that the opposite of water is 
milk, or the opposite of a spoon is zfork—but later, that very same child 
may also insist that the opposite of fork is knife. Thus, opposites depend 
on the contexts they're in, and so may overrule consistency. 

Intensities and Magnitudes. Although it is hard to describe what feelings 
are, it seems easy to say how intense they are. This makes it seem quite 
natural to apply such adjectives as slightly, largely, or extremely to almost 
every emotion word—such as sorry, pleasant, happy, or sad. 

We often justify a choice by declaring that we like a certain option 


THU EMOTJOIV MACHINE 

more or less than another one—as though those options were like points 
on a line. However, that kind of one-dimensional comparison can lead us 
into supposing that both options are almost the same—except for having 
"plus" or "minus" signs! However, as we said, Sorrow is not the mere 
absence of Joy, Thus, representing feelings in terms of intensities can simplify 
how we make our decisions—by encouraging us to overlook other 
kinds of distinctions in cases where we ought to use more thoughtful ways 
to deal with things!4 

Structural vs. Functional Descriptions. Many of our distinctions 
are based on ways to make connections between the structures of things 
and the ways in which we can use those things. Accordingly, it is often 
convenient to classify the parts of an object as playing "principal" vs. "supporting" 
roles—just as we did for "a chair" in Chapter 8-3, where we 
identify the seat and back as its functional parts, and its legs as merely 
serving to hold them up.5 

Function 

-
Support 


Certainly, two-part distinctions can be useful when we need to choose 
between alternatives, but when that fails, we may have to resort to more 
complex distinctions. For example, when Carol is trying to build that 
arch, it will sometimes suffice for her to first describe each block as being 
short or tall, or narrow or wide, or thin or thick; then she may need only 
to decide which of those distinctions is relevant. However, on othet occasions, 
Carol may need to find a block that satisfies some more elaborate 
combination of constraints that relate its height, width, and depth; then 
she can no longet describe that block in terms of only a single dimension. 


THE SELF 317 


Inborn Brain Machinery. Another reason why we tend to think in terms 
of pairs could be that our brains are innately equipped with special ways to 
detect differences between pairs of mental representations. Thus in Chapter 
6-4 we mentioned that when you touch somediing very hot or cold, 
the sensation is intense at first, but then will rapidly fade away-—because 
our external senses mainly react to how things change in time. (This also 
applies to our visual sensors, but we're normally unaware of this because 
our eyes are almost always in motion.) If this same sensitivity to change also 
applies to sensors inside a brain, this would make it easy to compare a pair 
of descriptions, simply by alternately presenting them. However, this "temporal 
blinking" scheme would work less well for describing the relationships 
of more than two things—and that could be one reason why people are so 
much less proficient at making three-way comparisons.6 

When is it appropriate to distinguish between only two alternatives? 
We often speak as though it is enough to classify a new thing or event in 
"yes or no" terms like these: 

Was this a failure or a success? 

Should we see it as usual or exceptional? 

Should we forget it or remember it? 

Is it a cause for pleasure or for distress? 

Such two-part distinctions can be useful when we have only two options 
to choose among. However, selecting what to remember or do will usually 
depend on making more complex decisions like these: 

How should we describe this event? 

What links should we connect it with? 

Which other things is it similar to? 

What other uses could we make of it? 

Which of our friends should we tell about it? 

More generally, it usually makes little sense to commit ourselves, for all 
future times, about which objects to like or dislike—or about which persons, 
places, goals, or beliefs we should seek or avoid, or accept or reject—because 
all such decisions should also depend on the contexts that we find ourselves 
in. Accordingly, it seems to me that there is something wrong with 
most dumbbell distinctions: those divisions appear to be so simple and 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

clear that they seem to be all that you need—and that satisfaction tempts 
you to stop. Yet most of the novel ideas in this book came from finding 
that two parts are rarely enough—and eventually my rule became: when 
thinking about psychology, one shoulA never start with less than three different 
parts or hypotheses! 

Why are we so often satisfied with dividing things into only two 
kinds? Perhaps rhis is at least partly because a typical child's environment 
contains so few significant "triplets" of things, A two-year-old has only 
two feet, and is taught by a pair of parents to learn to put on a pair of 
shoes—and soon, that typical two-year-old will learn to understand and 
to use the word two. But it frequently takes another full year for a child to 
learn to use the word three— perhaps because our environments contain so 
few instances of "three-nesses." We all excel at contrasting pairs of things 
and making lists of their differences, but our cultures and languages do 
not provide us with terms for talking about relationships among triplets of 
things. Why don't we have words for trichotomies or trifferences'i 

9-3 Why Do We Like the Idea of a Self? 

Brian: You are all individuals! 
Mob: We are all individuals! 
Lone voice: I'm not. 


—Monty Pythons The Life of Brian 

Most of the time we think of ourselves as having definire identities, 

Introspectionist: I do not feel like a scattered cloud of separate 
parts and processes. Instead, I sense that there's some sort of Presence 
in me—an Identity, Spirit, or Feeling of Being—that governs 
and guides all the rest of me. 

Other times we find ourselves feeling less unified or centralized. 

Citizen: One part of me wants this, while another part of me 
wants that. I need to get more control of myself. 

One philosopher claimed never to feel any sense of unity. 


THE SELF 319 

Josiah Royce 1908: "I can never find out what my will is by merely 
brooding over my natural desires, or by following my momentary 
caprices. For by nature I am a sort of meeting place of countless 
streams ot ancestral tendency. .. . I am a collection of impulses. 
There is no one desire that is always present to me." 

In any case, even when we feel that we're in control, we recognize conflicts 
among our goals and compulsions that we can't overcome. Then we may 
argue inside our minds, trying to find a compromise—but even when we 
feel unified, others may see us as disorganized. 

We solve easy problems in routine ways, scarcely thinking about how 
we accomplish these—but when our usual methods don't work, we start 
to "reflect" on what went wrong and find ourselves to be switching around 
in a network of "models," each of which purports to represent some facet 
or aspect of ourselves, so that we end representing ourselves wirh a loosely 
connected collection of images, models, and anecdotes. 

Still, if this is how one represents one's Self, there is nothing special 
about this—because that's how we represent everything else. Thus, when you 
think about a telephone, you keep switching among different views of its 
appearance, its physical structure, and the feelings you have when you use 
it, and so forth, as though exploring the facets ofapanalogy. So when you 
think about your Self, you arc using the same techniques with which you 
think about everyday things; parts of your mind keep switching among 
multiple models and processes. But if so, then what impels us to believe 
that we must be anything more than Josiah Royces meetings of streams? 
What leads us to the strange idea that our thoughts cannot just proceed by 
themselves, but need yet something else to control themselves? 

Jerry Fodor 1998: "If there is a community of computers living in 
my head, there had also better be somebody who is in charge; and, 
by God, it had better be Me." 

Citizen: If no central Self exists, why does it feel as though I have 
one? When I think irly thoughts and imagine things, must not 
there be someone who's doing those things? 

Obviously, there's a problem with this: if we had those Single Selves to 
want and feel and think for us, then we would not have any need for 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

minds—and if our minds could do those things by themselves, then of 
what possible use would those Selves be to us? Aha! Perhaps that is precisely 
the point: 1 suspect that we use words like "A/,?" and "I" to keep us 
from thinking about what we are! For they all give the very same answer, 
"Myself,"to every such question that we might ask. Here are some other 

ways in which rhat Single-Self concept is useful to us in everyday life. 

A Localized Body. You cannot walk through solid walls, or stay aloft 
without support. Where any part of your body goes, the rest of you must 
also go—and the Single-Seif model implies the idea of being in only one 
place at a time. 

A Private Mind. It is pleasant to think of your Self as being tike a strong, 
closed box, so that no one else can share your thoughts to learn the secrets 
you want to keep—for only you hold the keys to those locks. 

Explaining our Minds. Perhaps it seems to make sense to say things like 
"Jperceive the things that I see, "because we know so very little about how 
our perceptions actually work. This way, that Single-Self view can help to 
keep us from wasting time on questions we don't know answers to. 

Moral Responsibility. Each culture needs behavioral codes. For example, 
because our resources are limited, we all agree to censure Greed. 
Because we each depend on others, we have agreed to chastise Treachery, 
And to justify our laws and decrees, we assume that our Selves are "responsible" 
for every willful, intentional deed. 

Centralized Economy. We'd never accomplish anything if we kept asking 
questions like "Have I considered every alternative?" We prevent this 
with Critics that interrupt us with, "That's enough thinking; I've made 
my decision!" 

Causal Attribution. When we represent any thing or event, we like to 
attribute some Cause to it. So when we don't know what led to some 
thought, we assume that the Self was the cause of it. This way, wc may 
sometimes use the word "Self" the way we say It in "It started to rain" 
because we don't know a more plausible cause. 


THE SELF 321 

Attention and Focus. We often think of our mental events as occurring 
in a single "stream of consciousness"—as though they all were emerging 
from some single, central kind of source, which can attend to only one 
thing at a time. 

Social Relations. Other people expect us to think of them as Single 
Selves, so unless we adopt a similar view, it will be hard to communicate 
with them. 

These all are good reasons why the Singie-Self view is convenienr to use 
in our everyday lives. But if you want to understand how your thinking 
works, no simple mode! could portray enough details of how our minds 
work. Nor would it help for you to have some way to observe your entire 
mind simultaneously, because then you would be overwhelmed by seeing 
too many unwanted details. So eventually, you will need to switch among 
simplified models of yourself. 

Why must those models be simplifications? Each model must help us 
to focus on only those aspects that matter in some particular context; that's 
what makes a map more useful to us than seeing the entire landscape that 
it depicts. The same applies to what we store in our minds. Consider how 
messy our minds would become if we filled them up with descriptions of 
things whose details had too little significance. So instead, we spend large 
parts of our lives at trying to tidy up our minds—selecting the portions 
we want to keep, suppressing others we'd like to forget, and refining the 
ones we're dissatisfied with.' 

9-4 What Is Pleasure, and Why Do We Like It? 

Aristotle b: "We may lay it down that Pleasure is a movement by 
which the soul as a whole is consciously brought into its normal 
state of being; and that Pain is the opposite. If this is what pleasure 
is, it is clear that the pleasant is what tends to produce this 
condition, while that which tends to destroy it, or to cause the 
soul to be brought into the opposite state, is painful." 

We tend to feel pleased—or at least, relieved—when we accomplish something 
we want. Thus, as we remarked in Chaprer 2: 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

When Carol recognized that her goal was achieved, she felt satisfaction, 
fulfillment, and pleasure—and those feelings then helped 
her to learn and remember. 

Of course, we're delighted that Carol felt pleased, but how did those feelings 
help her to learn—and why do we like those feelings so much, and 
work so hard to find ways to attain them? Indeed, what does it mean to say 
that someone feels "pleased"? When people answet questions like these, 
we frequently hear examples of circular reasoning: 

Citizen: I do the things that I like to do because I get pleasure 
from doing them. And naturally, I find them pleasant because 
those arc the things that I like to do. 

One reason why we get into such circles is that we usually cannot describe 
any feeling itself, but can resort only to analogies, like "Thatpain was as 
piercing as a knife." What could make something so hard to describe that 
we're forced to refer to comparisons? Clearly, this is likely to happen when 
we don't have a way to divide that thing—be it an object, a ptocess, or a 
mental state—into several parts, or layers, or phases. This is because a thing 
that we cannot split into parts gives us nothing to use as pieces of explanation! 

However, this goes against the popular view that such feelings as pleasure 
or pain are "basic" or "elemental" in the sense that they can't be explained 
in terms of these things. 

However, this section will argue that what we call "pleasure" is a suitcase-
word for quite a few different processes that we don't often recognize, 
and this has been an obstacle to understanding our psychology. So let's 
try to catalog some of the feelings and activities that make the concept of 
"pleasure" more complex than it might seem. 

Satisfaction. A species of pleasure called "satisfaction" comes when 
an ambition has been achieved. 

Exploration. We may also feel pleasure during a quest—and not 
only at the end of it. So it is not only a matter ol being rewarded 
for achieving a goal. 

Goal-suppression. You may also regard your condition as pleasant if 
some other process has suppressed most of your other critics and 
goals. 

Relief. A species of pleasure called "relief "may come when a problem 
has been solved—if that goal was represented as an irritation. 


THE SELF 

Success can also fill you with pleasure and pride—and may aiso motivate 
you to show other persons what you have done. But the pleasure of success 
soon fades because, no sooner is one problem put to rest than another one 
quickly replaces it. Besides, few of our problems stand by themselves; they 
are usually only parts of larger ones. 

Also, after you've solved a difficult problem, you may feel relieved 
and satisfied, and sometimes may also feel a need to arrange for some 
sort of inner or outer celebration. Why might we have such rituals? Perhaps 
there's a special kind of relief that comes when one can dismiss a 
goal and release the resources that it engaged—along with the stresses 
that came with them. Clearing out one's mental house may help to make 
other things easier—just as the "closure" of a funeral can help to assuage 
a persons grief. 

But what if the problem you're facing persists? You can sometimes 
regard your present disrress as a benefit, as in "I'm certainly learning a lot 

from this," or "Others may learn from my mistakes." And everyone knows 
this magical trick lor turning all failures into success: one can always tell 
oneself, "The true reward is the journey itself." 

So instead of trying to say what Pleasure is, we'll need to develop more 
ideas about what processes might be involved in what we often describe 
in simple tetms—such as "feeling good." In parricuiar, it seems to me that 
we often use words like pleasure and satisfaction to refer to an extensive 
network of processes that we do not yet understand, and when anything 
seems so complex that we can't grasp it all at once, then we tend to treat it 
as though it were single and indivisible. 

"Pleasures are ever in our hands or eyes, 
And when in act they cease, in prospect, rise: 
Presenr to grasp, and future still to find, 
The whole employ of body and of mind." 


—Alexander Pope, in Essay on Man 

The Pleasure of Exploration 

St. Augustine: "Pleasure pursues objects that are beautiful, melodious, 
fragrant, savory, soft. But curiosity, seeking new experiences, 
will even seek out the contrary of these, not to experience the 
discomfort that may come with them, but from a passion for 
experimenting and knowledge." 


 THK UMGOTOIN MACHINE 

Understanding a new and difficult subject—or exploring an unfamiliar 
terrain—can lead to a lot of pain and stress. Then how can we keep this 
from holding us back from learning new ways to accomplish things? One 
antidote for this is adventurousness. 

Minsky 1986: "Why do children enjoy the rides in amusement 
parks, knowing that they will be scared, even sick? Why do explorers 
endure discomfort and pain—knowing that their very purpose 
will disperse once they arrive? And what makes people work for 
years at jobs they hate, so that someday they will be able to—they 
seem to have forgotten what! It is the same for solving difficult 
problems, or climbing freezing mountain peaks, or playing pipe 
organs with one's feet: some parts of the mind find these horrible, 
while other parts enjoy forcing those first parts to work lor them," 

Most of our everyday learning involves only minor adjustments to skills 
that we already know how to use. One can do this by using "trial and 
error"; one makes a small change, and if that results in a pleasant reward 
(such as being pleased with an improved performance) then that change 
will become more permanent. This fact has led many teachers to recommend 
that "learning environments" should mainly consist of situations in 
which pupils get frequent rewards for success. To promote this, then, it is 
often suggested that one should help the students to progress through a 
sequence of small, easy steps. 

Edward L. Thorndike 1911: "The Law of Effect is that: Of several 
responses made to the same situation, those which are accompanied 
or closely followed by satisfaction to the animal will, other 
things being equal, be more firmly connected with the situation, 
so that, when it recurs, they will be more likely to recur; those 
which are accompanied or closely followed by discomfort to the 
animal will, other things being equal, have their connections with 
that situation weakened, so that, when it recurs, they will be less 
likely to occur. The greater the satisfaction or discomfort, the 
greater the strengthening or weakening of the bond." 

However, this pleasant and positive strategy may not work well in unfamiliar 
realms because when we are learning a new technique, we need 


THE SKIT 325 


to work harder with fewer rewards, while enduring the additional stress 
of being confused and disoriented. Also, it may require us to abandon 
older techniques and representations that have previously served us well— 
which might even arouse a sense of loss that brings negative" reelings akin 
to grief. Such periods of awkwardness and inepritudc would usually cause 
a person to quit. 

Thus "pleasant" or "positive" pracrice, alone, may not suffice for us 
to learn more radically different Ways to Think. This, in turn, suggests 
that to become proficient at learning new things, a person must somehow 
acquire what St. Augustine called, in the extract on page 323, "a passion 
for experimenting and knowledge." Such persons must somehow have 
managed to train themselves actually to enjoy those discomforts. 

Citizen: How can you speak of "enjoying" discomfort? Isn't that a 

self-contradiction? 

It is only a contradiction when you regard your Self as a single thing. But 
when you see the mind as a cloud of conflicting resources, then you no 
longer need to think of pleasure as a "basic" or all-or-none thing. For now 
you can imagine that, while some parts of your mind are uncomfortable, 
other parts of your mind may enjoy forcing those first parts to work for them. 

For example, one part of your mind can still represent your state in a positive 
way, by saying, "Good, this is a chance to experience awkwardness and to 
discover new kinds of mistakes!" 

Citizen; But wouldn't you still be feeling that pain? 

Indeed, when struggling at their seemingly punishing tasks, athletes 
still feel physical pain, and artists and scientists feel mental pains—but, 
somehow, they seem to have trained themselves to keep those pains from 
spiraling into the awful cascades we call "suffering." But how could those 
persons have learned to suppress, ignore, or enjoy those pains, while preventing 
those disruption cascades? To answer that, we would need to know 
more about our mental machinery. 

Scientist: Pethaps this does not really need any special explanation, 

because explorations can provide their own rewards. For me, few 

things bring more pleasure than making radical new hypotheses— 


 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

and then showing that their predictions are correct, despite the 
objections of my competitors. 

Artist: It seems almost the same to me, because nothing surpasses 
the thrill of conceiving a new kind of method or representation 
and then confirming that this will produce new effects in my 
audience. 

Psychologist: Many achievers regard their ability to function in 
spite of pain, rejection, or adversity to be among their outstanding 
accomplishments! 

All this suggests that "exploration pleasure" (however it works) may be 
indispensable to those who want to keep on extending their abilities. To 
be sure, we usually see pleasure as positive, but one can see it as negative—
because of how it tends to suppress other competing activities. 
More generally, to accomplish any major goal, one may need to suppress 
most competing goals, as in, "I don't feel like doing anything else." 
Most traditional theories of learning assumed that an action that led 
to pleasure would be reinforced, so that you'll be more likely to react 
that way in the future. However, I suspect that pleasure also helps us to 
learn by engaging another, more "negative" function that works to keep 
our minds from "changing the subject" while credit assignment is being 
accomplished! 

9-5 What Makes Feelings So Hard to Describe? 

"A color stands abroad 
On solitary hills 
That science cannot overtake 
But human nature feels" 


-—Emily Dickinson3 

Many thinkers have wondered about the relations between our minds and 
our brains. If the bodies (of which our brains are parts) consist of nothing 
more than physical stuff, then each person must be some sort of machine. 
Of course, that machine is immensely complex; in every human embryo, 
billions of unirs of DNA are involved with assembling countless atoms 


THE SELF 327 


and molecules into intricate arrangements of thousands of types of membranes, 
fibers, pumps, and pipes. Nevertheless, one still has to ask how 
any such structures could ever support what we call our sensations and 
thoughts? 

Dualist philosopher: Computers can do only what they're programmed 
to do, simply proceeding from step to step, without 
any sense that they're doing this. Machines can have no goals or 
aversions or pleasures or pains—or any sensations or feelings at 
all because they lack certain vital ingredients that can only exist 
in living things. 

But what could those "vital ingredients" be? Many philosophers have 
wondered how a thing composed only of physical parts could ever "really" 
feel or think. 

David Chalmers 1995b: "When we visually perceive the world, 
we do not just process information; we have a subjective experience 
of color, shape, and depth. We have experiences associated 
with othet senses (think of auditory experiences of music, or the 
ineffable nature of smell experiences), with bodily sensations (e.g., 
pains, tickles, and orgasms), with mental imagery (e.g., the colored 
shapes that appear when one tubs one's eyes), with emotion 
(the sparkle of happiness, the intensity of anger, the weight of 
despair), and with the stream of conscious thought. 

'[That we have a sense of experiencing] is the central fact 
about the mind, but it is also the most mysterious. Why should a 
physical system, no matter how complex and well-organized, give 
rise to experience at all? Why is it that all this processing does not 
go on "in the dark," without any subjective quality? Right now, 
nobody has good answets to these questions. This is the phenomenon 
that makes consciousness a real mystery," 

However, it seems to me that the mysteries that Chalmers sees result 
from squeezing multiple mental activities into suitcase-words like subjective, 
sensations, and consciousness. For example, Chapter 4-2 showed how 
people use the word consciousness for at least a dozen mental processes— 
and Chapter 5-7 showed that our perceptual systems also involve many 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

types and levels of processing. However, our higher-level processes cannot 
detect all those intermediate steps—-and this lack of insight leads us to the 
belief that our sensations come to us in some way that is simple, direct, 
and immediate." 

For example, whenever something touches your hand, it seems to you 
that you instantly sense that you have felt a touch on your hand—and that 
this happened immediately, without any complex processing. Similarly, when 
you look at a color and sense that it's red, no intermediate steps seem to 
intervene—and so you can find nothing to say about it. Surely this is at 
least partly why so many philosophical thinkers conclude that there can be 
no "mechanical" explanation of why different stimuli seem each to have 
particular qualities: they simply have not worked hard enough to imagine 
adequate models of those processes; instead, they mainly attempted to 
show that no such models would ever be possible. 

Now, although we find it hard to speak about the character of any 
particular, single, sensation, we find it far easier to compare or contrast 
two different but similar kinds of sensations. Fot example, one can say 
that sunlight is brighter than candlelight, or that pink lies in between red 
and white, or that a touch on your cheek is somewhere between your ear 
and your chin. 

However, this says nothing about how each separate sensation "feels." 
It's like describing the distance between two towns on a map, while saying 
nothing about those individual towns. Similarly, if 1 were to ask what 
the color red means to you, you might first say that it makes you think 
of a rose, which then reminds you of being in love—and then you'll find 
yourself relating this to other kinds of sensations and feelings; red might 
also remind you of blood, and make you feel some sense of dread or fear. 
Similarly, green might make one think about pastoral scenes and blue 
might suggest the sky or the sea. Thus, a seemingly simple stimulus can 
lead to many other kinds of mental events, such as these other feelings and 
reminiscences. 

Similarly, when you try to describe the feelings that come with being 
in love, or from suffering fear, or when seeing a pasture or a sea, you'll soon 
find that you are merely mentioning yet other things that these remindyou 
of. And then, perhaps, you will come to suspect that one can never really 
describe what anything is; one can only describe what that thing is like. 

What would be a useful alternative to the idea that out sense of "expetiencing" 
is mysterious? Well, if your higher cognitive levels had better 


THE SELF 329 

access to your lower ones, then you might be able to replace statements like 
"/ am experiencing the sensation of seeing something red" by more detailed 
descriptions of the processing that sensations involve, such as 

"My resources have classified certain stimuli, and then made some 
representations of my situation, and then some of my Critics 
changed certain plans 1 had made, and altered some ways in which 
I was perceiving things, and this led to the following sorts of 
cascades, and so forth." 

If we were able to make such descriptions, the mystery of "subjective 
experience" should disappear, because then we would have enough ingredienrs 
to answer our questions about those processes. In other words, it 
seems to me, the apparent "directness of experience" is an illusion that 
comes because our higher mental levels have such limited access to the 
systems we use to recognize, represent, and react to our external and 
internal conditions. 

I don't mean to suggest that this illusion is usually harmful, or that 
we should strive to surmount all those limitations, because, as we noted 
in Chapter 4-4, too much such information might overload our minds; 
however, some such therapy might benefit some of those dualist philosophers. 
Also, in some future time, we will have to make decisions about 
the extent to which our future Artificial Intelligence machines should be 
equipped with ways to inspect (and then, to also be able to change) their 
own systems—or whether we'll need to prohibit that access. 

How Do You Know When You're Feeling a Pain? 

Common sense might answer that you can't have a pain without knowing 
it. However, some thinkers disagree with that: 

Gilbert Ryle 1949: "A walker engaged in a heated dispute may 
be unconscious of the sensations in his blistered heel, and the 
reader of these wotds was, when he began this sentence, probably 
unconscious of the muscular and skin sensations in the back 
of his neck or his left knee. A person may also be unconscious or 
unaware that he is frowning, beating time to the music, ot muttering." 



 THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Similarly, Joan might first notice a change in her gait, and only later 
notice that she's been favoring her injured knee. Indeed, her friends may 
be more aware than she is of how much that pain is affecting her. Thus, 
one's first awareness of being in pain may come only after detecting 
other signs of its effects, such as discomfort or in elf ectiveness—perhaps 
by using the kind of machinery that we described in Chapter 4-3. 

Resources Activity Hurti/tg-
Detectors Recognizer 
o—^~5~&*| Awkwardness ]^ A 
°° o^. j DisorientationDiscomfort 
K-tvr^\-*^ 
R 
Limping 

If you think you feel pain, could you be mistaken? Some would insist 
that this cannot be because pain is the same as feeling pain—but again, our 
philosopher disagrees: 

Gilbert Ryle 1949: "The fact that a person takes heed of his 
organic sensations does not entail that he is exempt from error 
about them. He can make mistakes about their causes and he can 
make mistakes about their locations. Furthermore, he can make 
mistakes about whether they are real or fancied, as hypochondriacs 
do." 

We can make such mistakes because what we "perceive" does not come 
directly from physical sensors but from our higher-level processes. Thus, 
at first the source of your pain may seem vague because you have only 
noticed that somethings disrupting your train of thought; then the best 
that you can say might be, "/ don't feel quite right, but I don't quite know 
why. It could be a headache just starting to hurt. Or maybe the start of a bellyache." 
Similarly, when you are falling asleep, the first things you notice 
might be that you've started to yawn, or you keep nodding your head, 
or you're making a lot of grammatical errors; indeed, your friends might 
notice these before you do. One might even see this as evidence that people 
have no special ways to recognize their own mental states, but do this 
with the same methods they use to recognize how other persons feel. 


THE SELF 331 


Charles; Surely that view is too extreme. Like anyone else, I can 
observe my behavior "objectively." However, I also have an ability-—
which philosophers call "privileged access"—with which I 
can inspect my own mind "subjectively" in ways that no other 
person can. 

We certainly each have some privileged access, but we should not overrate 
its significance. I suspect that our access to our own thoughts provides 
more quantity but does not seem to reveal much more about the nature of 
our own mental activities. Indeed, our self-assessments are sometimes so 
inept that our friends may have better ideas about how we think. 

Joan: Still, one thing is sure: none of my friends can feel my pain. 
I surely have privileged access to that. 

It is true that the nerves from your knee to your brain convey signals that 
none of your friends can receive. But it's almost the same when you talk 
to a friend through a telephone. "Privileged access" does not imply magic; 
it's metely a matter of privacy—and no matter how private those lines may 
be, you still must use other processes to assign any other significance to the 
signals that get to your brain from your knee. That's why Joan might find 
herself wondering, "Is this the same pain that f felt last winter, when my ski 
boot did not release quickly enough?" 

Joan: I'm not even sure that it was the same knee. But isn't something 
missing here? If sensations are nothing but signals on nerves, 
then why are there such distinctive differences between the tastes 
of sour and sweet, or between the colors of red and blue? 

9-6 The Sense of Having an Experience 

William James 1890: "It is astonishing what havoc is wrought in 
psychology by admitting at the outset apparently innocent suppositions, 
that nevertheless contain a flaw. . . . The notion that 
sensations, being the simplest things, are the first things to take 
up in psychology is one of these suppositions. The only thing 
which psychology has a right to postulate at the outset is the fact 
of thinking itself, and that must first be taken up and analyzed. If 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

sensations then prove to be amongst the elements of the thinking, 

we shall be no worse off as respects them than if we had taken 

them for granted at the start." 

Many philosophers have maintained that our sensations have certain 
"basic" qualities that cannot be reduced to anything else. For example, 
they claim that each color like red and each flavor like sweet has its own 
unique "quality" that cannot be described in terms of othet things. 

Of course, it is not hard to make a physical instrument to measure the 
amount of red light that comes from the surface of some particular apple, 
or to measure the weight of the sugar contained in the flesh of any particular 
peach. However (those philosophers claim), such measurements tell 
you nothing about the experience of seeing a redness or tasting a sweetness. 
And then (some philosophers go on to claim), if those "subjective experiences" 
cannot be detected by physical instruments, they must exist in a 
separate mental world, which would mean that we cannot explain how 
minds work in terms of machinery inside our brains. 

However, there is a serious flaw in that argument. For if you can say, 
"This apple looks red to me," then some "physical instrument" in your brain 
must have recognized the activity involved with that experience—and then 
caused your vocal tract to behave accordingly. That "experience-detecting" 
instrument could be another internal activity recognizer like those we've 
seen in Chapter 4-3. 

Resources Activity Redness-
Detectors Recognizer 

Reflective Processes 

Sensory Processes [.-J 

R-xt 

R

, Linguistic Processes j--" ^ 
Other Processes? r 

Our brain scientists have not yet located such circuits inside our 
brains—but it surely is only a matter of time before we find clusters of 
brain cells that recognize such combinations of conditions. Then we'll be 
able to take William James's advice and start to develop more constructive 
theories about the processes that we call "sensations" and "feelings." 

In any case, we already know that our perceptions are far from direct. 
For example, when a ray of light strikes the back of your eye, a signal will 


III! Sll I 

flow from each retinal cell that this excites—and those signals will then 
affect other resources inside your brain—and some of those resources will 
then construct descriptions and reports that influence yet other parts of 
your brain.1" At the same time, other streams of information will also 
affect those descriptions so that, when you try to describe your "experience," 
you'll be telling a story based on sixth-hand reports. 

The idea that sensations are "basic" may have been useful in older 
times, but today we need to recognize the extent to which our perceptions 
are affected by what our other resources may want or expect. In fact, as 
we mentioned in Chapter 5-7, more signals flow downward to the brain's 
sensory cortex than in the opposite direction, presumably to help us see 
what we expect to see—by priming us with an appropriate "simulus."This 
could help to explain, for example, how we frequently "see" things that do 
not exist—such as the "square" below.11 

Once we appreciate the complexity of our perceptual machinery, we 
can finally answer that question about why we find feelings so hard to 
describe. For what would a person need to be able to express their "subjective 
feelings"? Perhaps it is no accident that one meaning of the word 
express is "to squeeze"—for when you try to "express yourself," your language 
resources will have to pick and choose among the descriptions your 
other resources construct—and then attempt to squeeze a few of these 
through your tiny channels of phrases and gestures. 

Of course one can never describe one's whole state of mind, because 
one can focus on just a few things at a time, and because one's state is constantly 
changing—so, usually, you will simply settle for expressing those 
aspects whose signals seem most urgent at each moment. At one moment 
you're thinking about your foot; then some other sensation attracts your 
attention; perhaps you notice a change in some sound, or turn your head 
toward something in motion—and then you notice that you are noticing 
these. So you can never be "wholly aware of yourself" because "you" are 
a river of rivaling interests, always enmeshed in cascades of attempts to 
describe its ever-changing eddies and tides. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

9-7 How Is a Human Mind Organized? 

Jean Piaget 1923: "If children fail to understand one another, it is 
because they think they understand one another.... The explainer 
believes from the start that the listener will grasp everything, will 
almost know beforehand all that should be known. . , . These 
habits of thought account, in the first place, for the remarkable 
lack of precision in childish style." 

How do human minds develop? We know that our infants are already 
equipped at birth with ways to react to certain kinds of sounds and smells, 
to certain patterns of darkness and light, and to various tactile and haptic 
sensations. Then over the following months and years, the child proceeds 
through many stages of mental development. Eventually, each normal 
child learns to recognize, represent, and reflect upon some of his own 
internal states, and also comes to self-reflect on some of his intentions and 
feelings—and eventually learns to identify these with aspects of how other 
persons behave. 

What kinds of structures might we use to support those kinds of activities? 
Our previous chapters showed several views of how a human mind 
might be organized. We began by portraying the mind (or brain) as being 
based on a scheme that deals with various situations by activating certain 
sets of resources-—so that each such selection wil! function as a somewhat 
different Way to Think. 


To determine which set of resources to select, such a system could 
begin with simple sorts of If-*Do rules and could later start to replace 
these with more versatile Critics Selector schemes. 

Rule Based Reaction-Machine Critic-Selector Based Machine 

Specific Specific Recognize a Activate a V 
Situation Way to React Problem-Type Wav to Think 

IFs DOs Critics Selectors 


THE; SELF 

Chapters 5, 6, and 7 conjectured thar the adult mind comes to have 
multiple levels, each of which contains additional Critics, Selectors, and 
other sources. We also noted that these ideas seem consistent with Sigmund 
Freud's early view of the mind as a system for dealing with conflicts 
between our insrinctive and acquired ideas. 

Id 
Values, Goals, Ideals, and Taboos 

Superego 
Ways to settle conflicts 
Ego between low-level drives 
and high-level ideals 

Innate, Instinctive Wishes and Drives 

TH E FREUDIAN SANDWICH 

Finally, Chapter 8 went on to suggest that our various ways to represent 
knowledge and skills might also be arranged in levels that have 
increasing symbolic expressiveness. 

^ 
Symbolic Apple 

Connectionist Apple 

xorigin —p^[striicturePc^—AfW</ 
hpurtx4 
—i 
^/3 5 .25 
1 L 
»v J.rV^.03 -53^0*^47 S 
i*rccn|(ii|ipk' | 
.25J 

'73\
i3\ 

/ M Jrf^S^b* y \ 

J / 1 / V 1 / \ \ \) 

Each of those ways to envision a mind has different kinds of virtues 
and faults, so rather than ask which model is best, one needs to develop 
Critics that learn to choose when and how to use each of those models. 
However, none of the models that we have discussed does well to represent 
the organization of an entire human mind; each of them only helps us to 
think about certain kinds of mental activities. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

In any case, we also will need a model with room enough to have 
places to put answers ro questions that we have not even yet thought of 
asking. For this I have found it useful to think of the mind as though 
it were a decentralized cloud of yet unimagined processes, interacting in 
still unspecified ways. For example, one could envision something like the 
cloud of resources in Chapter 1, except filled with higher-level systems like 
those shown here. 

Credit Assignors 


Encouragers 

Is A MIND LIKE A HUMAN COMMUNITY? 

It might be tempting to portray our mental processes as organized 
like a typical human community—such as a residcnrial village or town, 
or an industrial company. In a typical corporate organization, the human 
resources are arranged in accord with some formal hierarchical plan. 

Presidents 

" Presides

Vice-Presidents 


vel
ll Managers \

Lower-leve 

6 6 6 6 o 


THE SELF 337 


We tend to invent this kind of "management tree" whenever there's 
more work than one person can do; then the work is divided into parts, 
which are assigned to subordinates. This picture might tempt us to identify 
a person's Self with the chief executive of a company, who controls a 
"chain of command" that branches down and out. 

However, this is not a good model for human brains, because an 
employee of a company might be able to learn to do almost any new 
task—whereas most parts of a brain are too specialized for that. Also, when 
a company becomes wealthy enough, it can expand to do new activities, 
by hiring additional employee minds,12 In contrast, people do not (yet) 
have practical ways to expand theit individual brains. In tact, it is almost 
the opposite: whenever you try to do several tasks at once, each of your 
subprocesses is likely to encounter new handicaps. Perhaps we should state 
this as a general principle. 

The Parallel Paradox: If you break a large job into several parts and 

try to work on them all at once, then each process may lose some com


petence, from lacking access to resources it needs. 

There is a popular belief that the brain gets much of its power and speed 
because it can do many things in parallel. Indeed, it is clear that some of 
our sensory, motor, and other systems can do many things simultaneously. 
However, it also seems clear that when we tackle more difficult problems, 
we increasingly need to divide those problems into parts, and focus on 
these sequentially This means that our higher, reflective levels of thought 
will tend to operate more serially. This may also partly account for our 
sense of having (or being) a "stream of consciousness." 

In contrast, when a company divides a job into parts, it can often pass 
them down to separate subordinates who can work more simultaneously. 
However, that leads to a different kind of cost: 

The Pinnacle Paradox: As an organization grows more complex, its 

chief executive will understand it less, and increasingly will need to 

place more trust in decisions made by subordinates. 

Of course, many human communities are less hierarchical than our companies 
are, and they use more cooperation, consensus, and compromise in 
making decisions and settling arguments. Such negotiations can be more 


 TH E KMQT10 N MACH1M E 

versatile than either dictatorship or "majority rule" (which gives each participant 
a spurious sense of "making a difference," despite the fact most 
differences thereby get canceled out). This also raises questions about the 
extent to which our human "subpersonalities" can learn to cooperate to 
help with larger jobs. 

Central and Peripheral Controls 

Every higher animal has evolved many resources—let's call them "alarmers"—
that can react to certain states of affairs by interrupting higher-level 
processes. These conditions include reactions to such signs of possible 
dangers as rapid motions and loud sounds, unexpected touches, and the 
sightings of insects, spiders, and snakes. We also react with alarm to aches 
and pains, feelings of illness, and hunger and thirst. Similarly, we are subject 
to more pleasant kinds of interruptions, such as the sights and smells 
of foods to eat, and of signals of sexual interest. 

Many such reactions work without interrupting your other mental 
activities—as when your hand moves to rub an insect bite, or your eyes 
turn away from excessive light. Other instinctive alarms may get more 
attention, such as impending collisions, extreme heat or cold, losing one's 
balance, loud noises or growls, or seeing a spider or a snake. 

We are also subject to alarms that seem to come from "inside the 
mind"—as when we detect an unexpected new idea or a menral process 
failing to work, or a conflict among our goals and ideals, or when we react 
to internal conditions such as shame or surprise. A Critic-Selector Model 
of Mind could account for many such mental reactions, using Correctors, 
Censors, and Suppressors. 

However, one also could use a less centralized view in which our thinking 
consists of interactions among many partly autonomous processes. 
For example, one could think of ones mind as like a city or town whose 
processes consist of the activities of subdepartments concerned with transportation, 
water, power, fire, police, school, planning, housing, parks, and 
streets—as well as legal and social services, public works, pest control, and 
so on, each with its own subadministrations. 

Should one think of a city as having a Self? Some observers might 
argue that each town has a certain "ambience" or "atmosphere," and certain 
traits and characteristics. But few would insist that a city or town has 
anything that resembles a human mind. 


THBSELF 339 


Citizen: Perhaps that's because they don't have your idea that a Self 
is a network of various models, each of which may help a mind 
to answer certain questions about itself. But in fact, each of those 
departments for planning, power, parks, and streets has plenty of 
diagrams and charts diat represent aspects of the town they're in. 

Programmer; Some modern computer systems work by combining 
multiple processes, each monitoring some of the others-—but 
it is hard to make such systems work reliably. So I wonder how all 
your resources could be combined to wotk togethet dependably. 
What happens if some of its parts break down? A single error in a 
large computet program can cause the entire system to stop. 

I suspect our human "thinking processes" often "break down," but you 
rarely notice that anytbing's wrong, because your systems so quickly switch 
you to think in different ways, while the systems that failed are repaired or 
replaced. Here are a few of the kinds of failures that are likely to get more 
"attention." 

You have ttouble recalling past events. 
You have trouble when solving an urgent problem. 
You cannot decide which action to take. 
You've lost track o( what you were trying to do. 
Something has happened that surprises you. 


Nevertheless, in cases like these, you can usually switch to other tactics 
and strategies. For example, you might change the domain you are searching 
through, or select some other problem to solve, or switch to some 
different overall plan, or make a major change in emotional state—without 
noticing that you are doing this. 

Furthermore, whenever some of your systems fail, your brain may 
retain some earlier versions of them. Then in situations where you get 
confused, you may be able to ask yourself, "How did I deal with such things 
in the past?"'and this might cause some parrs of your mind to "regress" to 
an earlier version of themselves, from an age when such matters seemed 
simpler to you. This suggests another reason as to why we might like the 
idea of having a Self: 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

Minsky 1986: "One's present personality cannot share all the 
thoughts of one's older personalities—and yet it has some sense 
that they exist. This is one reason why we feel that we possess an 
inner Self—a sort of ever-present person-friend, Inside the mind, 
whom we can always ask for help." 


LRealm--^ ^->


...— ^—^- ^a^ 

\ Dominion Realm 
Physical RealmSelf-
Conscious Reflection 
Self-Reflective Thinking 
Reflective Thinking 
Deliberative Thinking 
Learned Reactions 
Instinctive Reactions 


However, we should not ignore the fact that people are also subject to 
failures from which recovery may be difficult or impossible. For example, 
if something went wrong with the machinery that controls your Critic/ 
Selector processes, then the rest of your mind may become reduced to a 
disorganized cloud of conflicting resources—or get stuck with some single, 
unswitchable way to think. Here, again, is Lovecraft's observation: 

H. P. Lovecraft 1926: "The most merciful thing in the world, I 
think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. 
We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black 
seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage fat. 
The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto 
harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated 
knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our 
frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the 
revelation or flee from rhe deadly light into the peace and safety 
of a new dark age." 

THE SKIT 341 

Mental Bugs and Parasites 

It seems sale to predict that most of our future attempts to build large, 
growing Artificial Intelligences will be subject to all sorts of mental disorders. 
For if a mind could make changes in how ir works, it would face the 
risk of destroying itself. This could be one reason why our brains evolved 
so many partly separate systems, instead of a more unified and centralized 
one: there may have been substantial advantages to imposing limits on the 
extent to which out minds could examine themselves! 

For example, no single way to think should be permitted to gain too 
much control over the systems we use for remembering. For rhen it might 
be able to overwrite all that person's old memories. Similarly ir could be 
dangerous for any resource to remain very active for long, because then 
it might force the rest of the mind to spend all its time pursuing one particular 
goal. Also, if any resource were able to completely suppress some 
instinctive drives, then that resource might be able to force its person to 
never sleep, or to work to death, or to starve itself—and the same would 
apply to any resource that could control our .systems for pleasure and 
pain. 

While such drastic calamities are rare, many common human faults 
result from rhe growth of "mental parasites" that take the form of the self-
reproducing sets of ideas that Richard Dawkins called "memes." Such 
a collection of concepts may include ways to grow and protect itself- by 
displacing competing sets of ideas; see Susan Blakemore 1999. To protect 
themselves from such extremes, our brains evolved ways to balance between 
becoming too highly centralized or too dispersed to have much use. We had 
to be able to concentrate, yet also to respond to urgent alarms. Nevertheless, 
we still remain prone to doctrines, philosophies, faiths, and beliefs that 
spread through the populations of entire civilizations. It is hard to imagine 
any foolproof ways to protect ourselves from such infections. So far as I can 
see, the best we can do is to try to educate our children to learn more skills 
of critical thinking and methods of scientific verification. 

9-H The Dignity of Complexity 

Vitalist: Your theories are too mechanical, they're filled with parts 

but have no wholes. What they need is some kind of lifelike 

cement—some coherent essence to hold them together. 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

I sympathize with that quest for cement, but I can't see how tt could actually 
help, because whatever adhesive you might propose—such as a single 
central Self—you'd still be obliged to describe its parts, and the magical 
glue that binds them together. So words like spirit or essence serve only to 
make us keep asking the very same questions. As lor terms like me, myself, 
and /, these seem only to describe the times when we're using our models 
of our minds. 

Citizen: But surely, no being would want to think of itself as a disorderly 
mess of contraptions and gadgets. How could it have any 
self-respect when it sees itself as nothing more than the product of 
countless thousands of accidents? 

Perhaps the most popular concept of what we are assumes that we 
each have a central core—some sort of invisible spirit or ghost that comes 
to us as an anonymous gift. However, a more realistic view would recognize 
that each human mind that exists today is one result of a process in 
which decillions of previous creatures on Earth spent rheir lives reacting, 
adjusting, adapting, and dying so that some of their descendants might 
thrive. In that unthinkably vast history, all those creatures contributed to a 
tremendous set of experiments, each of which may have contributed to 
giving us slightly more powerful brains. 

"We don't yet know how that process began, except that it probably 
started in some small watery place and spread out to inhabit the oceans, 
seashores, deserts, and plains until our ancestors developed ways to live 
in the villages, cities, and towns that they built. However, we do know 
that this struggle went on for thirty million centuries and—so tar as we 
know—no other magnificent process like this has ever occurred in our 
universe. Yet most traditional accounts of our origins make no mention 
whatsoever about this prodigious saga of sacrifice. 

All this suggests that it would be reckless, rash, and negligent to dismiss 
our mental abilities as though they came as gratuitous gifts. For until 
we find good evidence for other intelligence in this universe, we should 
recognize how much we owe to all those creatures who died for us—and 
take care to ensure that the minds we inherit don't all go to waste from our 
making some foolish, world-wrecking mistake. 


THE SELF 343 


9-9 Some Sources of Human Resourcefulness 

Our unrivaled human resourcefulness developed over three vastly different 
scales of time. 

Genetic Endowment: The genes that shape our modern brains 

were selected from variations that occurred during the last half 

billion years. 

Each human brain contains hundred of different resources, each composed 
of millions of clusters of cells that come in many different varieties. 
These inherited systems help us to escape from various kinds of dangers 
and threats. 

Cultural Heritage: The sets of beliefs in each culture evolved over 

many centuries in which that human community selected ideas 

produced by its individuals. 

Our cultural traditions are the principal sources of every citizen's knowledge 
and skills because no person, alone, could ever invent as many ideas 
as a four-year-old child learns. 

Individual Experience: Each year, one learns millions of fragments 

of knowledge from our own private experiences. 

For example, consider how much knowledge hides in virtually every language 
word; il you listen to anything anyone says, you'll hear many useful 
analogies. We speak ol time as though it resembles space-—as when a listener 
wonders when a speaker wilier to some point. Also, we often think 
of time as a fluid that's "running out," and we talk about friendships in 
physical terms, as in "Carol and Joan are very c,W."All of our language is 
riddled and stitched with cross-linked ways of portraying things—and 
sometimes we call these "metaphors." (See Lakoff 1980.) 

Some metaphors seem quite pedestrian, such as when we speak ot 
"taking steps" to cause or prevent some happening. Other metaphors seem 
more remarkable—such as when a scientist thinks about a fluid as though 
it were like a bundle of tubes. We notice such analogies when they play 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

surprisingly productive roles, but we rarely observe how frequently we use 
the same techniques in commonsense thinking. (See LakofF 1980.) 

Some analogies have simple origins, as when they come from stripping 
away enough details to make two different subjects seem the same. 
More complex metaphors represent things as though they existed in other 
tealms in which we can use other familiar skills. I suspect that most of our 
commonsense knowledge may be embodied as metaphors in the forms 
that Chapter 6 called "paralogies." 

How do we learn those precious panalogies? I suspect that some of 
them (such as those analogies between space and time) are virtually born 
in our brains, because certain regions of our brains are genetically wired 
so that we can scarcely help but represent different realms of ideas as having 
analogous properties. However, on some occasions, some individual 
will discover a new kind of description or representation or formulation 
that is both so fruitful and so easy to use that it spreads through that 
person's community. Naturally, we'd like to know how those fertile discoveries 
were made, but many of those rare events may never be explained at 
all—because, like the mutations of our genes, such events need to happen 
only once, and then can spread from brain to btain. However, othet pervasive 
analogies may be so "natural" and inevitable that almost every child, 
by itself, will invent the same ones without any help. 

All of these kinds of inventiveness, combined with our unique expressiveness, 
have empowered our communities to deal with huge classes of 
new situations. The previous chapters discussed many aspects of what 
gives people so much resourcefulness: each of our processes has deficiencies, 
but we can usually find alternatives. 

We have multiple descriprions of things—and can quickly switch 

among them. 

We make memory-re cords of what we've done—so that later wc can 

reflect on them. 

Whenever one of our Ways to Think fails, we can switch to another. 

We split hard problems into smaller parts, and keep track of them 

with our context stacks. 

We manage to control our minds with all sorts of bribes, incentives, 

and threats. 

We have many different ways to learn and can also learn new ways 

to learn. 


THFSELF 345 


Nevertheless, our minds still have bugs. For, as our human brains evolved, 
each short-rerm advance exposed us to the danger of making new types 
of mistakes. For example, our wonderful powers to make abstractions can 
lead us to overlook vital exceptions. Our capacious memory systems are 
likely to accumulate wrong or misleading information. Our juvenile attachment-
learning schemes often lead us to believe whatever our Imprinters 
believe. Our imaginations are so powerful that we confuse realities with 
our fantasies; then we get obsessed with unachievable goals, and set out on 
extensive but futile quests—or become so loath to accept a failure or loss 
that wc try to regress to our lives of the past. 

We cannot expect to escape from all such bugs because, as every engineer 
knows, most every change in a complex system will introduce yet 
other troubles that won't show up till the system moves to a different 
environment. Also, each human brain is unique because it is built by pairs 
of inherited genes, each chosen at random from one of its parents; then, 
in that brain's early development, many smaller details will depend on 
other accidental events. How could such machines work reliably, in spite 
of so much variety? To explain this, quite a few thinkers have argued that 
our brains must be based on "holistic" principles, according to which 
every fragment of process or knowledge is "globally distributed" (in some 
unknown way) so that the system's behavior would still be the same in 
spite of the loss of some of its parts. 

However, the arguments in this book suggest that we do not need any 
such magical tricks—because we have so many different ways to accomplish 
any type of job. Also, it makes sense to suppose that many parts of 
our brains evolved as ways to correct (or to suppress) the effects of defects 
in other parts. This means that our scientists will find it hard to discover 
how human brains manage to work so well, and why they evolved in the 
ways that they did. I suspect that we won't understand such things until 
we have had more experience at trying to build such systems ourselves. 
Only then will we learn enough about which kinds of bugs we're likely to 
find and about how to keep them under control. 

In the coming decades, many researchers will try to develop more 
resourceful machines, but every system that we build will surprise us with 
new kinds of flaws—until those machines become clever enough to conceal 
their faults from us. Sometimes we'll be able to diagnose specific errors 
in those designs and then we'll be able to remedy the errors. But whenever 
we fail to find ways to make such repairs, we will have little choice except 


THE EMOTION MACHINE 

to add more checks and balances—lor example, by adding more Critics 
and Censors. However, we'll never find any one, foolproof way to choose 
(for example) between the advantages of immediate actions and the benefits 
of cautious, reflective thinking. So whatever we do, we can be sure 
that the road toward "posthuman minds" won't be smooth. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


This book develops some new ideas about our human mental activities. In 
some ways this is a sequel to my earlier book, The Society of Mind, which 
suggested some theories of how thinking works, when seen as a collection 
of partly separate processes. In contrast, The Emotion Machine is mainly 
concerned with our highest and most reflective thoughts, so that there is 
not much overlap between the subjects that these two books discuss. To 
understand any complex thing, one needs to look at it from several perspectives—
and this book attempts to describe the mind as rhough it could 
be seen "from inside"—while also suggesting techniques we could use for 
trying to build machines that "think." 

Most of these theories came mainly from me, but many related ideas 
have also appeared in earlier works by such researchers as Seymour Papert, 
Aaron Sioman, and Daniel Dennett, as welt as in the work ol my students. 
In particular, over the previous decade my student, the late Push Singh, 
was my most constant collaborator. 

Much of my thinking in earlier years was strongly influenced by such 
powerful minds as Seymour Papert, John McCarthy, Warren McCulloch, 
Manuel Blum, Ray Solomonoff, Claude Shannon, Oliver Selfridge, Allen 
Newell, Herbert Simon, Roger Schank, Douglas Lenat, Edward Fred-
kin, and Kenneth Haase. Also, many ideas came from my wife, Gloria 
Rudisch, MD, during the twenty years it took to develop these theories 
in this book. 

Some of the processes described herein have been shown to work in 
computer programs developed by Michael Travers, Robert Hearn, Nicholas 
Cassimatis, and Push Singh. However, most of the theories in this book 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

have not yet heen assembled into a larger working system, and I hope that 
this book will inspire future researchers to have that ambition. 

Many of these concepts also evolved from discussions on Internet 
newsgroups—especially with Chris Malcolm, Gary Forbis, Richard Long, 
Mark Rosenfelder, Neil Rickert, and many others. I aiso would like to 
recognize my discussions with such colleagues as Alan Kay, Carl Sagan, 
Danny Hillis, Edward Feigenbaum, Edward Fredkin, Gerald Sussman, 
GraziellaTonfoni, Hans Moravec, Jerome Lettvin, Joel Moses, John Nash, 
Nicholas Negroponte, Nils Nillsson, Patrick Gunkel, Patrick Winston, 
Richard Dawkins, Richard Feynman, Roger Schank, Russell Kirsch, Stephen 
Pinker, and Woodrow Bledsoe, and too many others to recollect. 

Also many improvements came from Barbara Barry, Cynthia Solomon, 
Danny Hillis, David Yarmush, Dean S. Edmonds, Eray Ozkural, 
John Nash, Lloyd Shapley, Mortimer Casson, Ray Kurzweil, and Russell 
Kirsch—as well as from such thoughtful writer friends as Arthur C. 
Clarke, David Brin, Frederick Pohl, Greg Egan, Gregory Benford, Harry 
Harrison, Isaac Asimov, James P Hogan, Jerry Pournelle, Larry Niven, 
Robert Heinlein, and Vernor Vinge. 

Finally, I want to acknowledge suggestions that came from hundreds 
ol students over the years, including Adolfo Guzman, Alison Druin, Ben 
Kuipers, Carl Hewitt, Carol Srohecker, Curtis Marx, Daniel Bob row, 
Daniel Gruhl, David Levitt, David MacDonald, David Waitz, Douglas 
Riecken, Dustin Smith, Edwina Rissland, Eugene Charniak, Eugene 
Freuder, Gary Drescher, Greg Gargarian, Howard Austin, Ian Eslick, Ira 
Goldstein, Ivan Sutherland, Jack Holloway, James Slagle, Jeremy Werrheimer, 
John Amuedo, Karl Sims, Kenneth Forbus, Larry Krakauer, Larry 
Roberts, Louis Hodes, Manuel Blum, Michael Hawley, Renata Bushko, 
Richard Greenblatt, Robert Lawler, Scott Fahlman, Stephen Smoliax, 
Steve Strassman, Terry Winograd, Thomas Evans, Tom Knight, Warren 
Teirelman, William Gosper, William Henneman, William Martin, and 
Yoichi Takebayashi. I regretfully apologize to the many others whose contributions 
I've overlooked mentioning here. 

Many of the references and quotations were found using the collection 
of ebooks in Michael Hart's website Project Gutenberg. 

I am also graceful for exrensive help given, in editing various versions 
of this book, by Nancy Mindick, Monica Strauss, Gloria Rudisch, Dustin 
Smith, Betty Lou McCIanahan, and countless students in the courses I've 
taught. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Also, I want to acknowledge the generous support for this work from 
Jeffrey Epstein, Kazuhiko Nishi, and the endowment of my MIT Professorship 
by the Toshiba Corporation—and to acknowledge as well the 
superb environment provided by Nicholas Negroponte and the MIT 
Media Lab. 


NOTES 


CHAPTER 1. FALLING IN LOVE 

1. 
Adapted from Barry Took and Marty Feldman, Round the Home, BBC Radio, 
1%6. 
2. 
Adapted from a note by Aaron Slomati in comp.ai.philosophy, May 16, 1995. 
3. 
Adapted from Nikolaas Tinbergen, The Study of Instinct (London: Oxford University 
Press, 1951). 
4. 
Rebecca West, The Strange Necessity (New York: Doubleday, 1928). 
CHAPTER 2. ATTACHMENTS AND GOALS 

1. 
This could relate to psychoanalytic theories about how such objects can help to 
make transitions from early attachments to other kinds of relationships. See, for 
example, www.mythosandlogos.com/Klein.htm. 
2. 
The idea of a "meme"—a package of infotmation passed from one mind ro 
another—was developed in Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1989). See also Susan Blackmore, The Meme Machine 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), and Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin's 
Dangerous Idea (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995). 
3- 
See John Bowlby, Attachment (New York: Basic Books, 1973), 217. Bowlby 
bases some of his discussion on the research of H. R. SchafFerand P. E. Emerson, 
found in "The Development of Social Attachments in Infancy," Monographs for 
the Society of Research in Child Development 29, no. 3 (1964), 1-77, who also 
discuss the effects of multiple attachments. 

4. 
Here, Bowlby is referring to Y. Spencer-Booth and R. A. Hinde, Animal Behavtor 
19 (1971): 174-191,595-605. 
5. 
Thete is some evidence that infants can imitate lip and tongue protrusion, 
mouth opening, and finger movement. Also see Charles A. Nelson, "The Development 
and Neural Bases of Face Recognition," Infant and Child Development 
10 (2001): 3-18, and Andrew N. Meltzoff and M. Keirh Moore, "Explaining 

NOTES 

Facial Imitation; A Theoretical Model," Early Development and Parenting 6 
(1997): 179-192. 

6. 
Jaak Pa nksepp's experiments (Panksepp, Affective Neuroscience [New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1998]) suggest that imprinting resembles addiction and that 
separation-distress may be similar to pain because both are relieved by opioids. 
Panksepp also discusses Howard Hoffman's [1996] conjecture that some aspects 
of an object's motion or shape can release endorphins in the imprintee's brain, 
causing the object to seem "familiar" enough to overcome fearful reactions. 
7. 
From a 1961 Setter to Mrs, H. L. Ausrin. 
CHAPTER 3. FROM PAIN TO SUFFERING 

1. 
Th i s di ag tam i s adap ted fro m h tt p: //www.christianhubert.com/hypertext/brain2 
-ipeg2. 
Larry Taylor gave permission for this quote from his unpublished essay titled 
"G. Gordon fiddy, Agent from CREEP." 
3. 
This recipe summarizes some discussions in William James, The Varieties ofReligious 
Experience (New York: Random House, 1994). 
4. 
For more details of this episode, see Chapter 4-5 of Minsky, The Society of Mind 
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986), 
CHAPTER 4. CONSCIOUSNESS 

1. 
I see Howatd Gardner's 2002 research as a major step toward unpacking the 
suitcase-word intelligence. 
2. 
Some psychologists use the word subcognitive rather than unconscious. 
3. 
It is often assumed that all our knowledge is "grounded" in worldly experience. 
However, in Minsky, "Interior Grounding, Reflection, and Self-Consciousness" 
(found in Proceedings of an International Conference on Brain, Mind and Society, 
Tohoku University, Japan, September 2005), 1 suggest that if we think of 
each part of the brain as interacting only with some other brain parts connected 
to it, then several such parts could learn, simultaneously, some ways to deal 
with their local environments. See http://web.media.mit.edu/-minsky/papets/ 
Intcrnal%20Grounding,html. 
4. 
Melissa Lee Phillips, "Seeing with New Sight" (available at http://faculty 
.washington.edu/chudler/visbhnd.html) describes some problems encountered 
by persons who have their vision restored after growing up without much visual 
experience. Perhaps we can see those persons as forced to work in McDermort's 
engine room. 
5. 
Adapted from Chapter 6-1 of Minsky, The Society of Mind (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1986). 
6. 
Out earliest robot once started to build an arch by first placing the top of the 
arch in what was to be its final location! It did not yet know enough to predict 
that an unsupported block would fall down. 

NOTES 

7. 
See Chapter 25-4 of Minsky, The Society of Mind. 
8. 
This idea is explained in more detail in "Matter, Mind, and Models," a chapter 
in Minsky, Semantic Information Processing (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
1968). Eull text is available at http://web.media,mit.edu/-minsky/papers/Matter 
Mind Models.cu, 
9. 
See http://www.impritit.eo.tLk/online/newl.html. 
10. An individual cell in the brain may have connections to thousands of other cells, 
but larger regions of the brain tend to have fewer connections to other such 
regions. 
CHAFFER 5. LEVELS OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 

1. 
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_chess and http://en.wikipedia.org/ 
w iki / Ad r iaan „de_G root. 
2. 
It took hundreds of millions of years to evolve die sensory systems that we use to 
recognize events in the outside world. However, it could have been much easier 
to evolve ways to recognize higher-level brain events—if those systems used simpler 
representations. This could be one reason why the higher levels of human 
thought could advance so much in only the last few million years. 
3. 
According to Nikolaas Tinbcrgen, The Study of Instinct (London: Oxford University 
Press, 1951), when an animal can't make a decision, this often results in 
dropping both alternatives and doing something that seems to be quite irrelevant. 
However, these "displacement activities" seem so fixed as to suggest that 
those animals lack thoughtful ways to deal with such conflicts. 
4. 
This is sometimes called Occam's razor, and is attributed to the fourteenth-
century logician William of Occam. 
5. 
Some early steps in that project are described in Marvin Minsky and Seymour 
Papert, Progress Report on Artificial Intelligence (available at http://web. media 
,mit.edu/-minsky/papei's/PR1971 .html). 
6. 
In fact, that darker horizontal streak is notiht lower edge; it is part of the slightly 
shadowed worn-down surface next to that edge. 
7. 
This program was based on ideas ofYoshiaki Shirai and Manuel Blum. See ftp:// 
publications.ai.mit.cdu/ai-publicaiions/pdf/AIM-263.pdf. I should note that 
Builder was able to deal only with very neat geometrical scenes, and even today 
there still are no general-purpose "seeing machines" that can recognize the everyday 
objects in a typical room. To do this, a machine would need the kinds of 
real-world knowledge discussed in Chapter 6. 
8. 
See papers by Adolfo Guzman at ftp://publications.ai.mit.edu/ai-publications/ 
pdfVAIM-139.pdf, and by David Waltz at ftp://publications.ai.mit.edu/ai 
-publications/pdf/AlTR-271 .pdf. 
9. 
Some persons claim to imagine scenes as though looking at a photograph, 
whereas other persons report no such vivid experiences. However, some studies 
appear to show that both ate equally good at recalling details of remembered 
scenes. 

NOTES 

10. 
See, for example, http://www.usd.edu/psyc301/Rensink.htm and http://nivea 
.psycho.univ-paris5.fr/Mudsplash/Nature_Supp_lnf/Movies/Movic_List.html. 
1 1. 
This prediction scheme appears in Section 6-7 of Minsky, "Neural-Analog Netwotks 
and the Brain-Model Problem," PhD diss., Princeton University, 1954. 
CHAPTER 6. COMMON SENSE 

1. 
See Goethe's poem, Tier'/Muherlehrling, at http://www.fln.vcu.edu/goethe/zauber 
.html. 
2. 
In a program developed by Push Singh, two robots actually consider such questions. 
See Push Singh, Marvin Minsky, and Ian Eslick, "Computing Commonsense," 
BT Technology Journal 22, no. 4 (October 2004) and Singh 2005a. 
3. 
Roger C. Schank, Conceptual Information Processing (New York: American 
Elsevier, 1975), suggested some of these ideas about the meanings of the prefix 
trans. 

4. 
See Douglas B. Lenat, The Dimensions of Context Space, available at http://www 
.cyc.com/doc/context-space.pdf. The CYC project is described at www.cyc.com. 
5. 
This discussion is adapted from my introduction to Minsky and Seymour Papert, 
Perceptrons, 2nd edition (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988), 
6. 
We frequently hear tales about prodigies who have memorized huge bodies of 
knowledge. However, I am skeptical of such accounts, because we never see 
reports of experiments done to rule out deceptive performances. 
7. 
Here the term bit of information is used in the technical sense that was defined in 
Claude E. Shannon, "A Mathematical Theory of Communication," Bell System 
Technical journal 21 (|uly and Octohet 1948). According to Ronald Rosenfeld, 
"A Maximum Entropy Approach to Adaptive Statistical Language Modeling," 
Computer, Speech and Language 10 (1996), the information in typical text is 
approximately six bits per word. It a person were to learn two bits per second for 
ten hours per day, dien thirty years of this would come to only about one billion bits 
of information, which is less than the capacity of a single compact disk. See also 
Ralph Merkle's description at http://www.merkle.com/hunianMemory.html. 
8. 
My impression is that this also applies to the results repotted in R. N. Haber, 
"20 Years of Haunting Eidetic Imagery: Where's the Chosi?" Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences 2 (1979), 583-629. 
9. 
See the cs say s ab out self-o t gan izi ng I ea r n i ng sys tern s by Ray mo n d J. So I o m o n off: 
"An Inductive Inference Machine," IRE Convention Record, section on Information 
Theory, Part 2, 1957: 56—62; "A Formal Theory °f Inductive Inference,'' 
Information and Control 7 (1964): 1-22; and "The Discovery of Algorithmic 
Probability," Journal of Computer and System Sciences 55, no. 1 (1997). See 
also Malcolm Pivar 1966; Douglas B. Lenat and Jon S. Btown, "Why AM and 
Eutisko Appear to Work," Artificial Intelligence 23 (1983); Douglas B. Lenat, 
"Eurisko: A Program Which Learns New Heuristics and Domain Concepts," 
Artificial Intelligence 21 (1983); Kenneth W. Haase, "Exploration and Invention 

NOTES 

in Discovery," PhD diss., MIT, 1986 (text available at hrrp://web,media.mit 
.edu/~haase/thesis); Kenneth W. Haase, "Discovery Systems," found in Advances 
in Artificial Intelligence (North-Holland: European Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, 1986); and Gary Drescher, Made-Up Minds (Cambridge, Mass.; 
MIT Press, 1991). In recent years some of these ideas evolved into a field of 
research called "Genetic Programming." 

10. 
After a system has reached a local peak, each small change will make things worse 
until one approaches a higher peak some distance away in the "fitness space." 
11. 
At the time of this writing, some researchers are trying to "annotate" the texts 
on the Web with links to the meanings of words and phrases, but I doubt that 
this will work well until those networks use structures like panalogies. There 
has also been recent progress toward extracting large bodies of commonsense 
knowledge with the help of thousands of users oi the Web. See the descriptions 
of the "Open Mind Common Sense" project in Push Singh, Thomas Lin, Erik T 
Mueller, Grace Lim, Travel! Perkins, and Wan Li Zhu, "Open Mind Common 
Sense: Knowledge Acquisition from the General Public," found in Proceedings 
of the First International Conference on Ontologies, Databases, and Applications 
of Semantics for Large Scale Information Systems, Irvine, Calif., and at http://csc 
.media.mit.cdu/ and http://commonsense.media,mit.edu/. 
12. 
This piggy-bank story was discussed extensively by Eugene Charniak in "Toward 
a Model of Children's Story Comprehension," PhD diss,, MIT, 1972 (also available 
at ftp://publications.ai.mit.cdu/ai-publications/pdf/AlTR-266.pdD; it has 
led to some of the theories in Minsky, A Framework for Representing Knowledge 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1974), and Minsky, The Society of Mind (New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1986). 
13. 
In each cycle of operation, the General Problem Solver program finds some differences 
between the current and desired states. Next, it uses a separate body of 
knowledge to guess which difference is most significant, and then it tries some 
methods that are likely to reduce that type ot difference. Newell 1960a and Newell 
and Herben A. Simon, "GPS, a Program That Simulates Human Thought," 
in Computers and Thought, edited by E. A. Feigenbaum and J. Feldman (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1963), describe how, when the difference-reducing processes 
tail, the system will attempt to switch to a different way to represent the 
situation. 
14. 
There is no reason to assume that a system must have a central, top-level goal, 
such as a "basic survival instinct," thai aims towatd keeping each animal alive. 
Each animal has many separate instincts, such as hunger, thirst, and defense, 
each of which evolved independently—but there is no reason to suppose (except, 
perhaps, in the human case) that there is any representation of "being alive" anywhere 
in that animal's brain. 
15. 
This could be seen as describing what programmers call a "top-down search 
tree." 
16. 
Chapter 22-10 of Minsky, The Society of Mind, conjectures that we use a Difference-
Engine process whenever two people attempt to communicate. 

356 
NOTES 

17. 
See articles on "change-blindness": Peter Kaiser, "The Joy ot Visual Perception," 
available at http://www.yorku.ca/eye/thejoy.htm; Kevin O'Regan, "Change-
Blindness," available at http://nivea.psycho.univ-paris5.fr/ECS/ECS-CB.html; 
and Kevin O'Regan, "Change Blindness as a Result of Mudsplashes," in Nature, 
August 2, 1998. However, many of our sensors detect certain especially harmful 
conditions, and those sensors respond with signals that do not so quickly fade 
away. 
18. 
Roger Schank, Tell Me a Story (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1990), has 
conjectured that representing events as stories may be one of out principal ways 
to learn and remember, 
19. 
See more theories about musical perception in Minsky, "Music, Mind, and 
Meaning," Computer Music Journal5, no. 3 (Fall 1981). 
20. 
In Clynes 1978 the musician-physiologist Manfred Clynes has described certain 
temporal patterns, each of which seems to help to induce a particular kind of 
emotional state. 
21. 
One could ask the same questions about gossip, spotts, and games. See New 
Zealand lim e Use Study at http://www.stats.govt.nz/analytical-reports/time 
-use-survey.htm. 
22. 
Full text of The Arabian Nights is at http://www.gutenberg.net/etext94/arabnl l.txt. 
23. 
See http://cogsci.uwaterloo.ca/Articles/Pages/how-to-decidc.html. 
24. 
Chapter 30-6 of Minsky, The Society of Mind, discusses why the idea of free will 
seems so powerful. There are many more ideas about this in Daniel C. Dennett, 
Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1984). 
25. 
See Edward A. Feigenbaum and Julian Feldman, eds.. Computers and Thought 
(New York; McGraw-Hill, 1963), for more of the accomplishments of that period. 
26. 
People sometimes use "abstract" to mean "complex" or "highly intellectual"— 
but here I mean almost the opposite; a more abstract description describes fewer 
details, which makes it applicable to more situations. 
27. 
Papert's principle is discussed in more detail in Chapter 10-4 or Minsky, The 
Society of Mind. 
CHANLKT TIllNkIM; 

I, At the lowest levels, the Critics and Selectors become the same as the Ifs and 
Thens of simple reactions. At the reflective and higher levels, the Critics will tend 
to engage more resources and processes. Push Singh and Marvin Minsky, "An 
Architecture for Combining Ways to Think," in Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Knowledge Intensive Multi-Agent Systems (Cambridge, Mass.), discuss 
"Reflective Critics" with such abilities; and Singh, "EM-ONE: An Architecture 
for Reflective Commonsense Thinking," PhD diss., MIT, June 2005 (also 
available at http://web.media.mit.edu/-push/push-thesis.pdf). describes a working 
prototype of such a system, but there remains much more to do before we 
have a functioning six-level model. 


NOTES 
357 

2. 
Logic can be useful after a problem is solved, for justifying one's reasoning and 
for refining one's credit assignments; it may also be useful for making die credit 
assignments that we'll discuss in Chapter 8-5. There are many important discussions 
about the role of logic in com mo risen se thinking on John McCarthy's 
website at http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/frames.html. 
3. 
John Laird, Allen Newell, and Paul S. Rosenbloom, "Soar: An Architecture for 
General Intelligence," Artificial Intelligence 33, no. 1 (1987), describe a goalhased 
solving program called SOAR, which classifies obstacles into four types; 
Manuela Viezzer, "Ontologies and Problem-Solving Methods," 14th European 
Confetence on Artificial Intelligence, Humboldt University, Berlin, August 2000 
(also at wvvw.cs.bham.ac.uk/-mxv/publications/onto_engineering), is a useful 
survey ot other attempts to classify Problem Types. 
4. 
This could be related to why some brain waves become irregular when our thinking 
encounters obstacles. 
5. 
Figure 7-6 includes the names of some current ideas about how such records are 
represented. One can find many descriptions of these schemes by searching the 
Web for keywords like sensory memory, episodic memory, short-term memory, and 
working memory, etc. The ideas of Bernard J. Baars, "Understanding Subjectivity: 
Global Workspace Theory and the Resurrection of the Observing Self,"y<?wrnal 
ofConsciousness Studies 3, no. 3 (1996): 211-216, seem especially relevant to 
me. 
6. 
The construction of long-term memories appears to involve certain phases of 
sleep, in ways that are not yet understood. It also appears that different kinds 
of memories are each stored in somewhat different ways and in different locations 
in the brain, such as records of autobiographical events, about other kinds 
of episodes, about what are called "declarative" facts, and about perceptual and 
motor events. 
7. 
Chapter 19-10 of Minsky, The Society of Mind (New York; Simon and Schuster, 
1986), described a scheme called "Closingthe Ring, "which could help to reconnect 
some of the parts that were not at first retrieved. 
8. 
This is a version of a scene described in Chapter 1 of Minsky, The Society of 
Mind. 
9. 
See, for example, L. Friedrick-Cofer and A. C. Huston, "Television Violence and 
Aggression: The Debate Continues," Psychological Bulletin 100 (1986): 364— 
371. 
CHAPTER 8. RESOURCEFULNESS 

1. 
Alan Turing, "On Computable Numbers" (available at http://www.abelard.org/ 
tutpap2/tp2-ie.asp#section-l), desctibed these "universal" machines before any 
modern computers were built. The most important "small structural change" 
was to store the computer's program inside irs rewritable memory bank so that 
a program could change itself, and thus was potentially able to learn; earlier 
computers stored programs in externa) devices. For a simpler description of how 

NOTES 

these work, see Turing's "Computing Machinery and Intelligence," Mind 49 
(1950). Subsequently, it turned out that one could build universal machines 
using remarkably small sets of parts. 

2. 
This switching usually happens so quickly that we don't notice it; this is a typical 
instance of the Immanence Illusion of Chapter 4-5. 
3. 
It was recently discovered that people ohen do not perceive some very large 
changes in a scene. See articles on change-blindness by Peter Kaiser, The Joy of 
Visual Perception, available at http://www.yorku.ca/eye/thejoy.htm; and by Kevin 
O'Regan: "Change-Blindness," available at http://nivea.psycho.univ-paris5.fr/ 
ECS/ECS-CB.html, and "Change Blindness as a Result of Mudsplashes," in 
Nature, August 2, 1998. 
4. 
See Chapter 3 of William H. Calvin, How Brains Think (New York: Basic Books, 
1966). 
5. 
For more details about changes in visual appearances, see Chapter 24 of Minsky, 
The Society of Mind (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986), which also tries to 
explain why the shapes of things don't seem to change when we look at them 
from different directions and why things do not appear to change their locations 
when you move your eyes. 
6. 
Hume was especially concerned with this question of how evidence can lead to 
conclusions: "It is only after a long course of uniform experiments in any kind, 
that we attain a firm reliance and security with regard to a particular event. Now 
where is that process of reasoning which, from one instance, draws a conclusion, 
so different from that which it infers from a hundred instances that ate nowise different 
from that single one? I cannot find, 1 cannot imagine any such reasoning." 
7. 
How could a brain compare or make copies of elaborate, nerwork-like representations? 
In Chapters 22 and 23 of Minsky, The Society of Mind, 1 conjectured 
that this could be done only by using serial processes, and suggested that our 
brains use Difference-Engine techniques for making (and changing) copies of 
memories, as well as for communicating with verbal expressions. 
8. 
Note that this is a Differenee-Engine "in reverse"; it changes the internal description 
rather than changing the actual situation. 
9. 
Some of our memory systems use certain short-lived chemicals so that those 
memories will quickly fade unless those chemicals keep being refreshed—whereas 
it appears that our longer-term memories depend on the synthesis ot longer-persisting 
connections between the cells of the brain. Also, some information can be 
stored "dynamically,'' by being repeatedly echoed as signals inside circular loops 
of cells in the btain. However, Chapter 4-2 of Marvin Minsky, "Neural-Analog 
Networks and the Brain-Model Problem," PhD diss., Princeton University, 
1954, suggests that simple such loops cannot hold much data. 
10. 
Perhaps Carol used that facial expression to help her maintain her concentration. 
If this became part of her subsequent skills, it could later be hard to eliminate. 
11. 
In the field of Artificial Intelligence, the importance of credit assignment was 
tecognized by Arthur L. Samuel, "Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the 
Game of Checkers," IBM Journal of Research and Development 3 (July 1959): 

NOTES 

211-219, in his early research on learning machines. Psychologists should focus 

more on questions about how people try to find out why and bow each particu


lar method can help to solve certain particular kinds of problems. 

12. 
People often describe such moments as the times at which they make their decisions—
and then regard these as "acts of free will." However, one might instead 
regard those moments as merely the times at which one's "deciding" comes to a 
stop. 
13. 
Presumably, different parts of the same person's mind could use different methods 
for credit assignments. 
14. 
Some ot this section is adapted from Chapter 7-10 of Minsky, The Society of Mind. 
15. 
For more details, sec Minsky, A Framework for Representing Knowledge; Ross 
Qjillian's thesis (reprinted in Marvin Minsky, ed,. Semantic Inforrnation Processing 
[Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1968]); and Patrick H, Winston, ed., The 
Psychology of Computer Vision (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975). 
16. 
Where do we get those default assumptions? In Minsky 1974, A Framework for 
Representing Knowledge, I suggested that one usually makes a new frame by copying 
an older one while making some changes; then values that were not changed 
at that time will be inherited from those older ones. 
17. 
This is another instance of the Immanence Illusion mentioned in Chapter 4-5. 
1 should add that a ftame could also include additional slots for Selectors that 
activate other sets of resources, so chat a frame could also activate other, appropriate 
Ways to Think. 
18. 
The K-line idea was first developed in Minsky, "Plain Talk About Neutodevelopmenta! 
Epistemology," found in Proceedings of the Fifth International joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Cambridge, Mass., 1977), and Minsky, 
"K-lines, a Theory nt Memory," Cognitive Science 4 (1980); 117—133; Chapter 
8 of The Society of Mind describes more ideas about whac might happen when 
K-lines conflict, 
19. 
Chapter 20-1 of The Society of Mind, argues that even our thoughts can be 
ambiguous. 
20. 
My ideas about these "micronemes" were suggested by the "microfeatures" in 
David L, Wait?, and Jordan Pollack, "Massively Parallel Parsing," Cognitive Science'), 
no. 1 (1985); and some earlier ideas were in Calvin N. Mooers, "Information 
Retrieval on Structured Content," found in Information Theory, edited by 
C. Cherry (London: Butterworths, 1956). 
21. 
Also, several differenc functions could be superimposed in the same anatomical 
region, by using genetically distinct lines of cells that interact mainly among 
themselves. 
22. 
Later Kant claims that our minds must start with some "a priori" rules like 
"Every change must have a cause." Today, one might interpret this as suggesting 
that were born with trans-frames equipped with slots that are disposed to link 
to the causes ot changes. At first that effect could be achieved by a simple link 
to whatever preceded a recent change, and in later years we could learn to refine 
those links. 

360 
NOTES 

CHAPTER 9. THE SELF 

1. 
Dennett goes on to point out: "Homunculi are bogeymen only if they duplicate 
entire the talents they are rung in to explain. If one can get a team or committee 
of relatively ignorant, narrow-minded, blind homunculi to produce the intelligent 
behavior of rhe whole, this is progress." 
2. 
See http://www,theabsolute.net/minefield/wirforwisdom.html. 
3. 
Adapted from the entry on "Cold Reading" by Bertram Forer, in Robert Todd 
Carroll's The Skeptic's Dictionary: A Collection of Strange Beliefs, Amusing Deceptions, 
and Dangerous Delusions (New York: Wiley, 2003). 
4. 
Nevertheless, many feelings seem to come with varied degrees of both "positive" 
and "negative" intensities, and this has led some psychologists to maintain that 
this dimension of intensity is what distinguishes emotions from other types of 
mental states. See Andrew Ortony, Gerald T. Clore, and Allan Collins, The Cognitive 
Structure of the Emotions (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 
and Chapter 28 of Minsky, The Society of Mind (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1986). 
5. 
See also Chapter 13-1 ofMinsky, The Society of Mind. 
6. 
See Chapter 23-3 of The Society of Mind, about "temporal blinking." 
7. 
Roger Schank 1995 has suggesred that we mainly temember things that "make 
sense" because our memory systems have ways to store representations that have 
the form of coherent stories. 
8. 
Verse 2 of "A Light Exists in Spring," at http://www.firstscience.com/SITE/ 
poems/dickinson3.asp. 
9. 
Philosophers call this "the problem of qualia." There is a superb discussion of 
these "subjective qualities" in Daniel Dennett, "Quining Qualia," in Consciousness 
in Modern Science, edited by A. Marcel and E. Bisiach (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1988). 
10. 
In Fact, a single spot of red may not be sensed as being red; in general the colors 
we see depend, to a large extent, on which other colors are in its neighborhood. 
Although we understand some of the visual resources in our brains, we still do 
not yet have good explanations about, for example, how wc represent separate 
objects and their relationships. 
11. 
See Zenon Pvlyshyn, "Is Vision Continuous with Cognition?" available at http:// 
ruccs.rutgers.edu/faculry/ ZPbbs98.htm I. Also see Al Seckel, Masters of Deception 
(New York; Sterling Publishing, 2004). 
12. 
Another difference between human employees and parts of a brain is that each member 
of a company has personal conflicts of interest. For example, each employee is 
hired to increase the company's profit, but this conflicts with each employee's ambition 
to earn more salary. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Acerra et al. 1999: Francesca Acerra, Yves Burnod, and Scania de Schonen. "Modeling 
Face Recognition Learning in Early Infant Development," In Proceedings of 
European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Bruges, Belgium, April 21—23, 
1999, 129-134. Text available at http://www.dice.ucl.ac.be/Proceedings/esann/ 
esannpdf/es!999-22.pdf. 


Aristotle a: Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics, Book VIII, trans. W. D. Ross. Full text 
available at http://www.etext.library.adelaide.edu.aU/a/Aristode/nicomachean/. 


Aristotle b: Rhetoric. Full text available at http://etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/aa8rh/. 


Arnold 1865: Matthew Arnold. Essays in Criticism, Edited by S. R. Littlewood, Lon


don: Macmillan, 1958. 
Augustine 397: Augustine. The Confessions, Book 10. Text available at http://www 
.ourladyswarriors.org/saints/augcon 10.htm#chap 10. 


Baars 1996: Bernard J. Baars. "Understanding Subject ivity: Global Workspace Theory 
and the Resurrection of the Observing Self." Journal of Consciousness Studies 3, no. 3 
(1996): 211-216. Also available at http://www.imprint.co.uk/online/baars.html. 


Bacon 1620: Francis Bacon. Novum Organum. Available at http://etext.library 
.adelaide.edu.au/b/bacon/francis/organon/. 


Battro 2000: Antonio M. Battro. Haifa Brain Is Enough. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000. Also see http://www.nobel.se/medicine/Iaureates/ 
1981/sperry-lccture.html. 


Blackmore 1999: Susan Blackmore, The Meme Machine. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1999. 
Bowlby 1973a: John Bowlby. Attachment. New York; Basic Books, 1973. 


Bowl by 1973b; John Bowlby. Separation. New York: Basic Books, 1973. 


Calvin 1966: William H. Calvin. How Brains Think. New York: Basic Books, 1966, 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Calvin and Ojemann 1994: William H. Calvin and George A. Ojemann. Conversations 
with Neil's Brain: The Neural Nature of Thought and Language. Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley, 1994. Also available at http://williamcalvin.com/bk7/bk7.him. 


Carlson 1985: Shawn Carlson. "A Double-Blind Test of Astrology." Nature 318 


(December5, 1985): 419. 
Carroll 2003: Adapted from the entry on "Cold Reading" by Bertram Foret, in Robert 
Todd Carroll's The Skeptics Dictionary: A Collection of Strange Belief, Amusing 
Deceptions, and Dangerous Delusions. New York: Wiley, 2003. Text available at http:// 
skepdic.com/coldread.html. 


Chalmers 1995a: David J. Chalmers, "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." 
Journal of Consciousness Studies 2, no. 3 (1995): 200—219. Available at http://www 


.u. arizona.edu/-chalmers/papers/facing. htm I. 


Chalmers 1995b: David J. Chalmers. "The Puzzle of Conscious Experience." Scien


tific American (December 1995): 62-68. 
Chandler 2004: Keirh Chandler. Australian Journal of Parapsychology 4, no. 1 (June 
2004). Also available at http://www,keithchandler.com/Essays/Savant_Syndrome,html. 


Charniak 1972: Eugene Charniak. "Toward a Model of Children's Story Comprehension,'* 
PhD diss,, MIT, 1972. Also available at ftp://publications.ai.mit 
.edu/ai-publications/pdf/AITR-266.pdf. 


Clynes 1978: Manfted Clynes. Sentics. New York: Doubleday, 1978. 


Damasio 1995: Antonio R. Damasio. Descartes' Error. New York: Avon Books, 1995. 
Darwin 1871: Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1986. Also available at http://www.infidels.org/library/historical/charles_darwin/ 
descen t_o f_m an. 


Darwin 1872: Charles Darwin. Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. 
Edited by Paul Ekman. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998. 


Davies 1992: Robertson Davies. Tempest-Tost. New York: Penguin, 1992. 
Dawkins 1986: Richard Dawkins. The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution 
Reveals a Universe Without Design. New York: W W. Norton, 1986. 


Dawkins 1989: Richard Dawkins. The Selfish Gene. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1989. 


Dennett 1978: Daniel C. Dennett. "Why You Can't Build a Machine That Feels 
Pain." In Brainstorms. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1978, 190-229. 


Dennett 1984: Daniel C. Dennett. Elhow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth 

Wanting New York: Oxford University Press, 1984. 
Dennett 1988: Daniel Dennett. "Quining Qualia." In Consciousness in Modern 
Science. Edited by A. Matcel and E. Bisiach. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1988. Reprinted in Readings in Philosophy and Cognitive Science. Edited by A. Goldman. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1993. Text also available at http://cogprints 
.org/254/00/quinquaI.htm. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

363 

Dennett 1991: Daniel C. Dennett. Consciousness Explained. Boston: Litde, Brown, 3991. 
Dennett and Kinsbourne 1992a: Daniel C. Dennett and Marcel Kinsbourne. "Time 
and the Observer." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15, no. 2 (1992): 183—247. Also 
available at http://cogprints.eci.soron.ac.uk/archive/00000264/. 

Dennett 1992b: Daniel C. Dennett. "The Self as a Center of Narrative Gravity." 
In Self and Consciousness: Multiple Perspectives. Edited by E Kessel, P. Cole, and D. 
Johnson. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1992. Also available at http://cogprints.org/ 
266/00/selfctr.htm. 

Dennett 1995: Daniel C. Dennett. Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon and 

Schuster, 1995. 
Descartes 1637/ Rene Descartes, in Discowrs de la methode. "Et le second est que, bien 
quellesfissentplusieurs chases aussi bien, ou peut-etre mieux qu'aucun de nous, elks manqueraient 
infaiU'tblemeni en quelques autres, par lesquelles on decouvrirait qu'elies n'agtraient 
pas par connaissatice, mats seulement par la disposition de leurs organes. Car, au lieu que la 
ration est un instrument universel, qui peut servir en toutes sortes de rencontres, ces organes 
ont besoin de quelque particuliere disposition pour chaque action particuliire; d'oii vient 
qu'il est moraiernent impossible qu 'ily en ait assez de divers en une machine pour lafaire agir 
en toutes les occurrences de la vie, de memefacon que notre raison nous fait agir. " 

Drescher 1991: Gary Drescher. Made-Up Minds. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1991


Egan 1998: Greg Egan. Diaspora, Agawan, Mass.: Millennium Press, 1998. 

Einstein 1950: Albert Einstein. Out of My Later Years. New York: Philosophical 

Library, 1950, 15-20. 

Evans 1963: Thomas G. Evans. "A Heuristic Program to Solve Geo met tic-Analogy 

Problems." PhD diss., MIT, 1963. Abridged version in Minsky 1968, 271-353. 

Eeigenbaum and Eehlman 1963: Fdward. A. Feigenbaum and Julian Feldman, eds. 

Computers and Thought. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963. 

Feynman 1965: Richard Feynman, The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, Mass.: 

MIT Press, 1965, 168. 

Fodor 1992: J. A. Fodor. "The Big Idea: Can There Be a Science of the Mind?" Times 

Literary Supplement, July 1992, 5-7. 

Fodor 1998: Jerry Fodor. "The Trouble with Psychological Darwinism.1' London 

Review of Books 20, no. 2 (January 22, 1998). Also available at http://www.lrb.co.uk/ 

v20/n02/contcnts.html. 

Franklin 1772: Benjamin Franklin, Letter to Joseph Priestly, September 19, 1772. 

Text available at http://www.historycarper.com/resources/twobf5/letterl l.htm. 

Freud 1920: Sigmund Freud. A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis. New York: 

Boni and Liveright, 1920, 259. 

Fried rick-Co fer and Huston 1986: L, Friednck-Corer and A. C. Huston. "Television 

Violence and Aggression: The Debate Continues." Psychological Bulletin 100 (1986): 

364-371. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Gardner 2000; Howard Gardner, Intelligence Reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 

21st Century. New York: Basic Books, 2000, 
Goodall 1968: Jane van Lawick-Goodall. "The Behavior of Free-Living Chimpanzees 
in the Combe Stream Reserve." Animal Behavior Monogram / (1968): 161-311. 


Gregory 1998: Richard Gregory. "Brainy Mind." In British Medical Journal 317 
(1998), 1693. Also at www.richardgregory.org/papets/brainy_tniiKl/brainy-mindhtm. 


Gunkel 2006: Patrick Gunkel's ideas about ideas can be seen at http://ideonomy.mit.edu. 
Haase 1986a: Kenneth W. Haase. "Exploration and Invention in Discovery." PhD 
diss., MIT, 1986. Text available at http://web.media.mit.edu/-haase/thesis. 


Haase 1986b: Kenneth W. Haase. "Discovery Systems," In Advances in Artificial 


Intelligence. North-Holland: European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1986. 
Haase 1987: Kenneth W. Haase. "Typical: A Knowledge Representation System for 
Automated Discovery and Inference." Technical Report 922. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 1987. 


Haber 1979: R. N. Haber. "20 Years of Haunting Eidetic Imagery: Where's the 


Ghost?" Behavioral and Brain Sciences 2 (1979): 583-629. 
Hadamard 1945: Jacques Hadamard. The Phychology of Invention in the Mathematical 
Field. New York: Dover, 1945. 


Harlow 1958: Harry Llarlow, "The Nature of Love." American Psychologist 13 (1958): 


573-685. Available at http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Harlow/love.htm. 
Hayes 1997: Pat Hayes. "TheOnsetofConsciousnessinSpeech.'PsycheDiscussion Forum. 
September 29, 1997. See http://listseFv.ub.edu/egi-bin/wa?A2.=ind9709&l.=psyche 
-b&T=0&F=&S=&P=5262, 


Hinde 1971: R. A. Hinde and Y. Spencer-Booth. "Towards Understanding Individual 
Differences in Rhesus Mother-Infant Interaction." Animal Behaviour 19 (1971): 
165-173. 


Hoffman 1996: Howard Hoffman. Amorous Turkeys and Addicted Ducklings. Boston: 

Authors Cooperative, 1996. 
Horner and Gorman 1998: John R. Horner and James Gorman. Digging Dinosaurs. 
New York: Harper and Row, 1998, chapter 4. 


Hume 1748: David Hume. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. See 1777 
edition at http://www.etext.leeds.ac.uk/hume/ehu/ehupbsb.htm. 


Hume 1757: David Hume. The Natural History of Religion. Available at lmp://www 


.soci.niu.edu/-phildept/Dye/NaturalHistory.html, 
James 1890: William James. The Principles of Psychology. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1997. Full text available at http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/James/Principles/ 
preface.htm. 


James 1902; William James. The Varieties of Religious Experience. New York: Random 
House, 1994. 



MBIJOC-RAPHY 

Jamison 1994: Kay Redfield [amison. Touched ivith Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and 
the Artistic Temperament, New York: Free Press, 1994, 47-48. 

Jamison 1995: Kay Redfield Jamison, "Manic-Depressive Illness and Creativity." 


Scientific American 272, no. 2 (February 1995): 62-67. 
Johnston 1997: Elizabeth Johnston. "Infantile Amnesia." Available at http://pages.slc 
.edu/-ebj/IM_97/Tecture6/T6.html. 


Kaiser 2006; Peter Kaiser. The joy of Visual Perception. Available at http://www.yorku 
.ca/eye/thejoy.htm. 
Kant 1787: Immanuel Kant. Critique of Pure Reason. London: Dent, 1991. 
Koestler 1965: Arthur Koesder. The Act of Creation. New York: Macmillan, 1964. 


Korzybski 1933: Alfred Korzybski. Science and Sanity, Lakeville, Conn.: International 


Non-Aristotelian Library, 1958. Full text at http://www.esgs.org/uk/art/sands.htm. 
Laird 1987: John Laird, Allen Newell, and Paul S. Rosenbloom. "Soar: An Architecture 
for General Intelligence," Artificial Intelligence 33, no. 1 (1987). Sec also 
http://ai.eecs.um ich.edu/soar/sitemaker/docs/misc/Gentle I ntrodtiction-2006.pdf. 


Lakoft 1980: George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We live By. Chicago: 


University of Chicago Press, 1980. 
Lakoff 1992: George Lakoff. "The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor." In Metaphor 
and Thought, 2nd edition. Edited by Andrew Ortony. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press, 1993. Also available at http://www.acwwu.edu/-matket/semiotic/ 
I kof_met.htm I. 


Landauer 1986: Thomas K. I.andaucr. "How Much Do People Remember?" Cognitive 
Science 10 (1986): 477-493. 
Langley et al. 1987: Pat Langley, Herbert A. Simon, Gary L. Bradshaw, and Jan 


M. Zyikow. Scientific Discovery: Computational Explorations of the Creative Processes. 
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987. 
Lawler 1985: Robert W. Lawler. Computer Experience and Cognitive Development: A 
Child's Learning in a Computer Culture. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1985. 

Lenat 1976: Douglas B. Lenat. "AM: An Artificial Intelligence Approach to Discov


ery in Mathematics as Heotistic Search." PhD diss., Stanford University, 1976. 
Lenat and Brown 1983a: Douglas B. Lenat and John S. Brown. "Why AM and 
Lurisko Appear to Work." Artificial Intelligence 23 (1983). 

Ijenat 1983b: Douglas B. Lenat. "Eurisko: A Program Which Learns New Heuristics 
and Domain Concepts." Artificial'Intelligence 21 (1983). Also available at http://web 
.mcdia.mit.edu/-haase/thesis/node52.html. 

Lenat and Shepard 1990: Douglas B. Lenat and Mary Shepard. CYC: Representing 


Encyclopedic Knowledge. Digital Press, 1990. 
Lenat 1997: Douglas Lenat. "Artificial Intelligence as Common Sense Knowledge," 
Truth journal Available at http://www.leaderu.com/truth/2truth07.btml. 



 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Lenai 1998: Douglas B. Lenat. The Dimensions of Context Space. Available at http:// 
www. cyc.com/doc/context-space.pdf. 


Lewis 1982. F. M. Lewis. "Experienced Personal Control and Quality of Life in Late 
Stage Cancer Patients." Nursing Research 31, no. 2 (1982): 113-119. 


Lewis 1995a: Michael Lewis. Shame: The Exposed Self. New York: Free Press, 1995. 
Lewis 1995b: Michael Lewis. "Self-Conscious Emotions." American Scientist 83 
(January 1995). 


Lorenz 1970: Konrad Lorenz. Studies in Animal and Human Behaviour, vol. 1. Trans


lated by Robert Martin. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1970, 132. 
Lovectaft 1926: H. P. Lovectaft. The Call of Cthulhu and Other Weird Stories. Edited 
by S. T. Joshi. New York: Penguin Books, 1999. 


Luria 1968: Alexander R. Luria. TheMindofaMnemonist, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 


University Press, 1968. 
McCarthy 1959: John McCarthy. "Programs with Common Sense." In Procceedings 
of the Symposium on Mechanization of Thought Processes, vol. 1. Edited by D. V. Blake 
and A. M. Utdey. National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, England, HMSO, 
London, 1959, 5-27- Also available at http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/mcc59 
.html. 


McCutdy 1960: Harold G. McCurdy. "The Childhood Pattern of Genius." Horizon 
Magazine, May I960, 32-38. 
McDermott 1992: Drew McDermott. In comp.ai.philosophy. February 7, 1992. 


Meltzoffand Moore 1997: Andrew N. Meltzoffand M. Keith Moore. "Explaining 
Facial Imitation: A Theoretical Model." Early Development and Parenting 6 (1997): 
179-192. Also available at http://ilabs.washingtoii.edu/melizoff/pdf/97MeltzoiT_ 
Moo re_FacialI m i i. pdf. 


Melzack and Wall 1965: Ronald Melzack and Patrick Wall. In "Pain Mechanisms: A 
New Theory." Science 150 (1965): 975- Also see Tama Singer et al. Available at http:// 
www. fi 1. io n. ucl. ac. uk/- ts i nge r/pu bl ica ti o n s/s i n ge r_5Cl e nce_2 004, pdf. 


Melzack 1993: Ronald Melzack. "Pain: Past, Present and Future." Canadian Journal 


of Experimental Psychology Al (1993): 615-629. 
Merkie 1988: See Ralph Merkles description at http://www.merkle.com/human 
Memory.html. 


Minsky 1954: Marvin Minsky. "Neural-Analog Networks and the Brain-Model 
Problem." PhD diss., Princeton University, 1954. 


Minsky 1956: M, L. Minsky. "Heuristic Aspects of the Artificial Intelligence Problem." 
Lincoln Laboratory, MIT Group Rept. 34-55, ASTIA Doc. No. 236885, 
December 1956. 


Minsky 1968: Marvin Minsky, ed. Semantic Information Processing. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1968. This anthology is currently out of print, but my chapter, 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

"Matter, Mind, and Models," is also available at http://web.media.mit.edu/-minsky/ 
papers/ M atterMindModels.html. 

Minsky and Papert 1971: Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert. Progress Report 
on Artificial Intelligence. Available at http://web.media.mit.edu/--minsky/papers/ 
PR1971.html. 

Minsky 1974; Marvin Minsky. A Framework fur Representing Knowledge. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1974. Also available at http://web.media.mit.edu/-minsky/papers/ 
Frames/frames.html. 

Minsky 1977: Marvin Minsky. "Plain Talk About Neurodevelopmental Episremology." 
In Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
Cambridge, Mass., 1977. 

Minsky 1980a: Marvin Minsky. "Jokes and Their Relation to the Cognitive Unconscious." 
In Cognitive Constraints on Communication. Edited by Lucia Vaina and jaakko 
Hintikka. Boston: Reidel, 1981. Also available at web.media.mit.edu/--minsky/ 
papers/jokes.cognitive.txt. 

Minsky 1980b: Marvin Minsky. "K-lines, a Theory of Memory." Cognitive Science A 
(1980): 117-133. 

Minsky 1981: Marvin Minsky. "Music, Mind, and Meaning," Computer Music 
Journal 5, no. 3 (Fall 1981). Also available at web.media.mit.edu/-minsky/papers/ 

MusicMindMeaning.html. 

Minsky 1986: Marvin Minsky. The Society of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1986. 

Mtnsky and Papert 1988: Marvin Minsky and Seymout Papett. Perceptions, 2nd edition. 
Cambridge; MIT Press, 1988. 

Minsky 1991: Marvin Minsky. "Logical vs. Analogical or Symbolic vs. Connectionist 
or Neat vs. Scruffy." In Artificial Intelligence at MIT; Expanding Frontiers, vol. 1. 
Edited by Patrick H. Winston. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990. Also available at htcp:// 
web.media.mit.edu/-minsky/papers/SymbolicVs.Connectionist.html. 

Mtnsky 1992: Marvin Minsky. "Future of AI Technology." Toshiba Review 47, no. 
7 (July 1992), Also available at http://web.media.mit.edu/-minsky/papers/Causal 
Diversity.html. 

Minsky et al. 2004: Marvin Minsky, Push Singh, and Aaron Slotnan. "The St. 
Thomas Common Sense Symposium: Designing Architectures for Human-Level 
Intelligence." AI Magazine, Summer 2004. 

Minsky 2005: Marvin Minsky. "Interior Grounding, Reflection, and Self-Consciousness." 
In Proceedings of an International Conjerence on Brain, Mind and Society, Tohoku 
University, Japan, September 2005. See http://www.ic.is.tohoku.ac.jp/-GSlS/. Also 
available at http://web.media.mit.edu/-minsky/papers/lnternal%20Grounding.html. 

Mooers 1956: Calvin N. Mooers. "Information Retrieval on Structuted Content." In 
Information Theory. Edited by C. Cherry. London: Butrerworths, 1956. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Mueller 2006: Erik T Mueller. Commonsense Reasoning. Boston: Elsevier Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2006. 

Nelson 2001; Charles A. Nelson. "The Development and Neural Bases of Face 
Recognition." Infant and Child Development 10 (2001): 3-18. Also available at hup:// 
www.biac.duke.edu/education/courses/spring03/cogdev/readings/CA.%20 
Nelson%20(2001).pdf. 

Newel! 1955: Allen Newel I. "The Chess Machine." In Proceedings of Western Joint 
Computer Conference, March 1955. 

Newell et al. 1960a: A. Newell, J. C. Shaw, and H. A. Simon. "Report on a General 
Problem Solving Program." In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information 
Processing. Paris: UNESCO, 1960, 256-264. 

Newell et al. 1960b: Allen Newell, J. Clifford Shaw, and Herbert A. Simon. 'A Variety 
of Intelligent Learning in a General Problem Solver." In Self-Organizing Systems. 
Edited by M. T Yovins and S. Cameron. New York: Pergamon Press, 1960. I have 
seen few references to this profound idea since its original publication! 

Newell and Simon 1963: Allen Newell and Herhert A. Simon. "GPS, a Program 
That Simulates Human Thought." In Computers and Thought, Edited by E. A. Feigenbaum 
and J. Feldman. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963. 

Neweil 1972: Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon. Human Problem Solving. Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1972. See also http://sitemaker.umich.edu/soar tor 
a description of the problem-solving architecture called SOAR. 

O'Regan 2006: See Kevin O'Regan's articles on "Change-Blindness"at http://nivea 
.psycho.univ-paris5.fr/ECS/ECS-CB.html and "Change Blindness as a Result of 
Mudsplashes" in Nature, August 2, 1998. 

Ortony et al. 1988: Andrew Ortony, Gerald L. Clore, and Allan Collins. The Cognitive 
Structure of the Emotions. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 

Osterweis et al. 1987: Marian Osterweis, Arthur Kleinman, and David Mechanic. 
Pain and Disability: Clinical, Behavioral, and Public Policy Perspectives. Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press, 1987. 

Pagels 1988: Heinz Pagels. The Dreams of Reason: The Computer and the Rise of the 
Sciences of Complexity. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1988. 

Panksepp 1988. Jaak Panksepp and Manfred Clynes, eds. Emotions and Psychopathol


ogy. New York: Plenum Press, 1988. 
Panksepp 1998: Jaak Panksepp. Affective Neuroscience. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1998. 


Pepperberg 1998: See reports on Irene Pepperberg's research on parrots at hup:// 
www.alexloundation.org/irene.htm. Also available at http://pubpages.unh.edu/-jel/ 
video/alex.html. 

Perkins 1981: David N. Perkins. The Mind's Best Work. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1981. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Phillips 2004: Melissa Lee Phillips. Seeing with New Sight. Available at hitp://faculty 


.washington.edu/chudler/visblind.html. 
Piaget 1923: Jean Piaget. The Language and Thought of the Child. New York: Rout-
ledge, 2005. 


Pivar and Finkelstein 1966: M. Pivar and M. Finkeistein. The Programming Language 
LISP: Its Operation and Applications. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1966. 
Text available at hitp://commun ity.computerhistory.org/scc/projects/LISP/book/ 
IIIJUspBook_Apr66.pdf#page=270. 


Plsek 1996: Paul E. Plsck. Models for the Creative Process, Available at www.diiected 
creativity.com/ pages /WPModels.html. 


Pohl 1970: Frederik Pohl. Day Million. New York: Ballantine Books, 1970. 
I'oincare 1913: Henri Poincare. The Foundations of Science, Science and Hypothesis: 
'The Value of Science, Science arid Method, New York: Science Press, 1929. 


Polya 1954: George P61ya, Induction and Analogy in Mathematics. Princeton: Prince


ton University Press, 1954. 
Pdlya 1962: George Pdlya. Mathematical Discovery: On Understanding, Learning and 
Problem Solving. New York: Wiley, 1962. 


Proust 1927: Marcel Proust. Remembrance of Things Past. New York: Random House, 


1927-1932. 
Pylyshyn 1998: Zenon Pylyshyn. "Is Vision Continuous with Cognition." Available 
at http://ruccs.rutgets.edu/faculty/ZPbbs98.html. 


Quillian 1966: Ross Quillian. "Semantic Memory." PhD diss., Carnegie Institute of 


Technology, 1966. Reprinted in Minsky 1968. 
Ramachandran 2004: V. S, "Ramachandran." "Beauty or Brains?" Science 305, no. 
5685 (August 6, 2004). 


Rosenlcld 1996: Ronald Roscnfeld. "A Maximum Entropy Approach to Adaptive 
Statistical Language Modeling." Computer, Speech and Language 10 (1996). Also 
available at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/user/roni/WWW/me-csl-revised.ps. 


Royce 1908: Josiah Royce, The Philosophy of Loyalty. Nashville: Vanderbik University 
Press, 1995. 


Ryle 1949: Gilbert Ryle. The Concept of Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 


1949. 


Samuel 1959: Arthur L. Samuel. "Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game 


ofCheckers." LBM Journal of Research and Development 3 (July 1959): 211—219. 
Schaffer and Emerson 1964: H. R. Schafter and R E. Emerson. "The Development 
of Social Attachments in Infancy." Monographs for the Society of Research in Child 
Development 29, no. 3 (1964). 


Schank 1975: Roger C. Schank. Conceptual Information Processing. New York: American 
Elsevier, 1975. 



370 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Schank and Abelson 1977: Roger Schank and Robert Abelson, Scripts, Goals, Plans 

and Understanding. Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum Associates, 1977. 
Schank 1995: Roger Schank. Tell Me a Story. Evanston, 111.: Northwestern University 
Press, 1995. 


Seay et al. 1964: B. Seay, B. R. Alexander, and H. K Harlow. "Maternal Behavior of 
Socially Deprived Rhesus Monkeys." Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 69, 
no. 4 (1964): 345-354. 

Seckel 2004: Al Seckel. Masters of Deception. New York: Sterling Publishing, 2004. 

Shannon 1948: Claude £. Shannon. "A Mathematical Theory of Communication." 
Bell System Technical Journal 27 (July and October 1948). Also available at hrtp:// 
cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/what/sharinonday/shannonl948.pdf. 

Singh et al. 2002: Push Singh, Thomas Lin, Erik T Mueiler, Grace Lim, Travell Perkins, 
and Wan Li Zhu, "Open Mind Common Sense: Knowledge Acquisition from 
the General Public." Proceedings of the First International Conference on Ontologies, 
Databases, and Applications of Semantics for iMrge Scale Information Systems, Irvine, 
Calif. 

Singh 2003a: Push Singh. "Examining the Society of Mind." Computing and Informatics 
22, no. 5 (2003): 521—543. This article briefly describes the history of the 
Society of Mind theory, explains some of its essential components, and relates it to 
recent developments in Artificial Intelligence. Also available at http://web.media.mit 
.edu/-push/Ex ami ningSOM.pdf. 

Singh and Minsky 2003b: Push Singh and Marvin Minsky. "An Architecture for 
Combining Ways to Think." In Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge 
Intensive Multi-Agent Systems, Cambridge, Mass. 

Singh 2003c: "A Preliminary Collection of Reflective Critics for Layered Agent Architectures." 
In Proceedings of the Safe Agents Workshop, Melbourne, Australia: AAMAS, 
2003. Describes a class of agents concerned with noticing recent problems in the 
deliberations of a layered cornmonsense reasoning system. Also available at http:// 
web. media.mit.edu/-push/ Re flecti veCri tics. pdf. 

Singh et al. 2004: Push Singh, Marvin Minsky, and Ian Eslick. "Computing Cornmonsense." 
BT Technology journal 22, no. 4 (October 2004). Also available at 
hrrp://web.med ia.mit.edu/- push/Com puting-Commonsense-BTTJ. pdf. 

Singh 2005a: Push Singh. EM-ONE: An Architecture for Reflective Cornmonsense 
Thinking, PhD thesis, MIT, June 2005. Also available at http://web.media.mit.edu/ 

- push/push-thesis.pdf. 
Singh and Minsky 2005h: Push Singh and Marvin Minsky. "An Architecture for 
Cognitive Diversity." In Visions of Mind. Edited by Darryl Davis. London: Idea 
Group, 2005. 

Sloman 1992: Aaron Sloman. "Developing Concepts of Consciousness." Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences 14 (1992). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 371 

Solomonofl 1957: Raymond J. Solomonofl7. "An Inductive Inference Machine." IRE 

Convention Record. Section on Information Theory, Part 2 (1957); 56-62, 
Solomon off 1964: R. J, Solomonoff. "A Formal Theory of Inductive Inference." 
Information and Contrail (1964): 1—22. 


Solomonoff 1997: R- J. Solomonoff. "The Discovery of Algorithmic Probability." 
Journal of Computer and System Sciences 55, no. 1 (1997). Also available at bttp:// 


world.std.com/-rjs/barc97.html. 


Spencet-Booth and Hinde 1971; Y, Spencer-Booth and R. A. Hinde. Animal Behav


ior 19 (1971): 174-191, 595-605Spencer-
Brown 1972: G. Spencer-Brown. IMWS of Form. New York: Crown Publishers, 
1972. 


Sri Chinmoy 2003: Sri Chinmoy. "Consciousness." Text available at http://www.yoga 
ofsrichinmoy.com/ihe_highe rw o rlds/consciousnesss/. 


Stickgold et al. 2000: Robert Stickgold, April Malia, Denise Maguire, David Roddenberry, 
Margaret O'Connor. ''Replaying the Game: Hypnagogic Images in Normals 
and Amnesics." Science 290, no. 5490 (October 13,2000): 350-353. 


Thagard 2001: Paul Thagard. "How to Make Decisions: Coherence, Emotion, 
and Practical Inference," In Varieties of Practical Inference. Edited by E. Millgram. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001. Text also available at hitp://cogsci.uwatcdoo 
.ca/Articles/ Pages / h ow- to-decide.html, 


Thorndike 1911: Edward L. Thorndike. Animal Intelligence, New York: Macmillan, 


1911,244. 


Tinbergen 1951: NikolaasTinbergen, The Study of Instinct. London: Oxford Univer


sity Press, 1951. 


Turing 1936; Alan Turing. "On Computable Numbers." Available at http://www 


.abelard.org/turpap2/tp2-ie.asp#section-l. 
Turing 1950: Alan Turing. "Computing Machinery and Intelligence." Mind49 (1950). 
Also available at http://cogprints.org/499/00/turing.html and at www.cs.swarthmore 
.edu/-dylan/Turing.html. 


Viezzer 2000: Manuela Viezzer. "Ontologies and Problem-Solving Methods." 14th 
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Humboldt University, Berlin, August 
2000. Also available at www.cs.bham.ac.uk/-mxv/publications/onto_engineering. 


Vinacke 1952: W. E. Vinacke. The Psychology of Thinking. New York: McGraw-Hill, 


1952. 
Waltz and Pollack 1985: David L. Waltz and Jordan Pollack. "Massively Parallel 
Parsing." Cognitive Science 9, no. 1 (1985). 


Watts I960: Alan Watts, This Is It. New Yotk: Random House, 1960. 
Wertheimer 1945: Max Wettbcimer. Productive Thinking. New York: Harper and 
Brothers, 1945. 



 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

West 1928: Rebecca West. The Strange Necessity, New York: Doubleday, 1928. 


Wilde 1905: Oscar Wilde. De Profundis. New York: Knickerbocker Press, 1905- Text 
at http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext97/dprofl0.txt. 
Winston 1970: Patrick Winston, "learning Structural Descriptions from Examples," PhD 


diss. MIT, 1970. Also available at https://dspace.mit.cdu/bitstream/1721.l/6884/2/ 


AITR-231.pdf. 
Winston 1975: Patrick H. Winston, ed. The Psychology of Computer Vision. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1975. 


Winston 1984: Patrick H. Winston. Artificial Intelligence, 3rd edition. Boston: Addison-


Wesley, 1984, 1992. (The 1984 first edition is easier for beginners.) 
Wundt 1897: Wilhelm Wundt. Outlines of Psychology.Translated byC. H. Judd. Full 
text available at http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Wundt/Outlines/. 



