NINE STORIES
by J. D. Salinger

We know the sound of two hands clapping. But what is the sound of one hand clapping? --A ZEN KOAN


Contents

A Perfect Day for Bananafish Uncle Wigg ily in Connec ticut

3 10 18

Just Before the War with the Eskimos The Laughing Man Down at the Dinghy 25 32 38 49 55

For Esme:--wit h Lov e and Squalor Pretty Mouth and Gree n My Eyes De Daumier-Smit h's Blue Per iod Teddy 69


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

A Perfect Day for Bananafish
THERE WERE ninety-se ven New York adve rtising men in the hotel, and, the way they we re monopoliz ing the long-distance lines, the girl in 507 had to wait from noon till almost two-thirty to ge t he r call through. She used the time , though. She read an article in a women's pocket-size magaz ine, called "Sex Is Fun-or Hell." She washe d her comb and brush. She took the spot out of the skirt of he r be ige suit. She moved the button on he r Saks blouse. She tweezed out two freshly surfaced hairs in her mole . When the operator finally rang her room, she was sitting on the window seat and had almost finished putting lacquer on the nails of her left hand. She was a girl who for a ringing phone dropped exactly nothing. She looke d as if he r phone had been ringing continually e ve r since she had reached pube rty. With he r little lacque r brush, while the phone was ringing, she went ove r the nail of he r little finger, accentuating the line of the moon. She then replaced the cap on the bottle of lacque r and, standing up, passed her le ft--the wet--hand back and forth through the air. With he r dry hand, she picked up a congested ashtray from the window seat and carried it with he r over to the night table, on which the phone stood. She sat down on one of the made-up twin beds and--it was the fifth or sixth ring--picked up the phone . "Hello," she said, kee ping the fingers of her left hand outstretche d and away from her white silk dre ssing gown, which was all that she was wearing, exce pt mule s--he r rings we re in the bathroom. "I have your call to New York now, Mrs. Glass," the operator said. "Thank you," said the girl, and made room on the night table for the ashtray. A woman's voice came through. "Murie l? Is that you?" The girl turned the receive r slightly away from her ear. "Yes, Mothe r. How are you?" she said. "I've been worried to death about you. Why haven't you phoned? Are you all right?" "I tried to get you last night and the night be fore. The phone he re's been--" "Are you all right, Murie l?" The girl increased the angle between the re ceiver and her ear. "I'm fine . I'm hot. This is the hotte st day they've had in Florida in--" "Why haven't you calle d me? I've been worrie d to--" "Mother, darling, don't yell at me. I can hear you beautifully," said the girl. "I called you twice last night. Once just after--" "I told your fathe r you'd probably call last night. But, no, he had to-Are you all right, Murie l? Tell me the truth." "I'm fine. Stop asking me that, please ." "When did you get there?" "I don't know. Wednesday morning, e arly." "Who drove?" "He did," said the girl. "And don't get excite d. He drove very nicely. I was amazed." "He drove? Murie l, you gave me your word of--" "Mother," the girl interrupted, "I just told you. He drove very nice ly. Under fifty the whole way, as a matter of fact." "Did he try any of that funny business with the trees?" "I said he drove very nicely, Mother. Now, please. I asked him to stay close to the white line , and all, and he kne w what I meant, and he did. He was even trying not to look at the trees-you could tell. Did Daddy get the car fixed, incidentally?" "Not yet. They want four hundred dollars, just to--" "Mother, Seymour told Daddy that he 'd pay for it. The re 's no reason for--" "We ll, we'll see. How did he be have--in the car and all?" "All right," said the girl. "Did he keep calling you that awful--" "No. He has something new now." "What?"

[3]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "Oh, what's the differe nce, Mothe r?" "Muriel, I want to know. Your fathe r--" "All right, all right. He calls me Miss Spiritual Tramp of 1948," the girl said, and giggled. "It isn't funny, Murie l. It isn't funny at all. It's horrible . It's sad, actually. Whe n I think how--" "Mother," the girl interrupted, "listen to me . You remembe r that book he sent me from Ge rmany? You know--those German poems. What'd I do with it? I've been racking my--" "You have it." "Are you sure?" said the girl. "Certainly. That is, I have it. It's in Freddy's room. You left it he re and I didn't have room for it in the --Why? Does he want it?" "No. Only, he asked me about it, when we were driving down. He wanted to know if I'd read it." "It was in German!" "Yes, dear. That doesn't make any diffe re nce ," said the girl, crossing her le gs. "He said that the poems happen to be written by the only great poet of the century. He said I should've bought a translation or something. Or learned the language, if you please ." "Awful. Awful. It's sad, actually, is what it is. Your fathe r said last night--" "Just a second, Mothe r," the girl said. She went over to the window seat for her cigare ttes, lit one , and returned to he r seat on the bed. "Mother?" she said, exhaling smoke. "Muriel. Now, listen to me." "I'm listening." "Your fathe r talked to Dr. Sive tski." "Oh?" said the girl. "He told him everything. At least, he said he did--you know your father. The trees. That business with the window. Those horrible things he said to Granny about he r plans for passing away. What he did with all those lovely pictures from Be rmuda-everything." "We ll?" said the girl. "We ll. In the first place , he said it was a pe rfect crime the Army released him from the hospital--my word of honor. He very de finitely told your fathe r there's a chance--a very great chance, he said--that Seymour may completely lose control of himse lf. My word of honor." "There's a psychiatrist here at the hotel," said the girl. "Who? What's his name?" "I don't know. Rieser or something. He's supposed to be very good." "Never heard of him." "We ll, he's supposed to be very good, anyway." "Muriel, don't be fresh, please . We're ve ry worried about you. Your fathe r wanted to wire you last night to come home, as a matte r of f--" "I'm not coming home right now, Mothe r. So re lax." "Muriel. My word of honor. Dr. Sive tski said Seymour may completely lose contr--" "I just got here, Mothe r. This is the first vacation I've had in years, and I'm not going to just pack everything and come home ," said the girl. "I couldn't trave l now anyway. I'm so sunburned I can hardly move." "You're badly sunburned? Didn't you use that jar of Bronze I put in your bag? I put it right--" "I use d it. I'm burned anyway." "That's te rrible. Whe re are you burne d?" "All over, dear, all over." "That's te rrible." "I'll live." "Tell me , did you talk to this psychiatrist?" "We ll, sort of," said the girl. "What'd he say? Whe re was Seymour when you talked to him?"

[4]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "In the Ocean Room, playing the piano. He's playe d the piano both nights we've been he re ." "We ll, what'd he say?" "Oh, nothing much. He spoke to me first. I was sitting next to him at Bingo last night, and he asked me if that wasn't my husband playing the piano in the other room. I said ye s, it was, and he asked me if Se ymour's been sick or something. So I said--" "Why'd he ask that?" "I don't know, Mothe r. I guess because he's so pale and all," said the girl. "Anyway, after Bingo he and his wife asked me if I wouldn't like to join them for a drink. So I did. His wife was horrible . You remember that awful dinne r dress we saw in Bonwit's window? The one you said you'd have to have a tiny, tiny--" "The green?" "She had it on. And all hips. She ke pt asking me if Se ymour's related to that Suzanne Glass that has that place on Madison Avenue--the milline ry." "What'd he say, though? The doctor." "Oh. We ll, nothing much, really. I mean we we re in the bar and all. It was te rribly noisy." "Yes, but did--did you te ll him what he tried to do with Granny's chair?" "No, Mother. I didn't go into details very much," said the girl. "I'll probably get a chance to talk to him again. He's in the bar all day long." "Did he say he thought there was a chance he might get--you know--funny or anything? Do something to you!" "Not exactly," said the girl. "He had to have more facts, Mothe r. They have to know about your childhood--all that stuff. I told you, we could hardly talk, it was so noisy in there." "We ll. How's your blue coat?" "All right. I had some of the padding taken out." "How are the clothes this year?" "Terrible. But out of this world. You see sequins--everything," said the girl. "How's your room?" "All right. J ust all right, though. We couldn't get the room we had be fore the war," said the girl. "The people are awful this year. You should see what sits next to us in the dining room. At the next table . They look as if they drove down in a truck." "We ll, it's that way all over. How's your ballerina?" "It's too long. I told you it was too long." "Muriel, I'm only going to ask you once more --are you really all right?" "Yes, Mothe r," said the girl. "For the nine tieth time." "And you don't want to come home?" "No, Mother." "Your fathe r said last night that he'd be more than willing to pay for it if you'd go away someplace by yourse lf and think things over. You could take a love ly cruise. We both thought--" "No, thanks," said the girl, and uncrossed he r legs. "Mother, this call is costing a for--" "When I think of how you waited for that boy all through the war-I mean when you think of all those crazy little wives who--" "Mother," said the girl, "we'd better hang up. Seymour may come in any minute ." "Where is he?" "On the beach." "On the beach? By himself? Does he behave himself on the beach?" "Mother," said the girl, "you talk about him as though he were a raving maniac--" "I said nothing of the kind, Muriel." "We ll, you sound that way. I mean all he doe s is lie there. He won't take his bathrobe off." "He won't take his bathrobe off? Why not?" "I don't know. I guess be cause he's so pale ." "My goodne ss, he needs the sun. Can't you make him?

[5]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "You know Seymour," said the girl, and crossed her legs again. "He says he doesn't want a lot of fools looking at his tattoo." "He doe sn't have any tattoo! Did he get one in the Army?" "No, Mother. No, dear," said the girl, and stood up. "Listen, I'll call you tomorrow, maybe." "Muriel. Now, listen to me." "Yes, Mothe r," said the girl, putting her we ight on her right leg. "Call me the instant he does, or says, anything at all funny--you know what I mean. Do you hear me?" "Mother, I'm not afraid of Seymour." "Muriel, I want you to promise me ." "All right, I promise. Goodbye, Mothe r," said the girl. "My love to Daddy." She hung up . "See more glass," said Sybil Carpente r, who was staying at the hotel with he r mother. "Did you see more glass?" "Pussycat, stop saying that. It's driving Mommy absolutely crazy. Hold still, please." Mrs. Carpenter was putting sun-tan oil on Sybil's shoulders, spreading it down ove r the de licate , winglike blades of he r back. Sybil was sitting insecure ly on a huge, inflated be ach ball, facing the ocean. She was wearing a canary-yellow two-piece bathing suit, one piece of which she would not actually be needing for another nine or ten years. "It was really just an ordinary silk handkerchief--you could see when you got up close," said the woman in the beach chair beside Mrs. Carpenter's. "I wish I knew how she tied it. It was really darling." "It sounds darling," Mrs. Carpenter agreed. "Sybil, hold still, pussy." "Did you see more glass?" said Sybil. Mrs. Carpenter sighed. "All right," she said. She re place d the cap on the sun-tan oil bottle. "Now run and play, pussy. Mommy's going up to the hotel and have a Martini with Mrs. Hubbe l. I'll bring you the olive." Se t loose, Sybil immediate ly ran down to the flat part of the beach and began to walk in the direction of Fisherman's Pavilion. Stopping only to sink a foot in a soggy, collapsed castle, she was soon out of the area re se rved for guests of the hotel. She walked for about a quarte r of a mile and then suddenly broke into an oblique run up the soft part of the beach. She stoppe d short when she reache d the place where a young man was lying on his back. "Are you going in the wate r, see more glass?" she said. The young man started, his right hand going to the lape ls of his terry-cloth robe . He turned over on his stomach, letting a sausaged towe l fall away from his eyes, and squinted up at Sybil. "Hey. Hello, Sybil." "Are you going in the wate r?" "I was waiting for you," said the young man. "What's new?" "What?" said Sybil. "What's new? What's on the program?" "My daddy's coming tomorrow on a nairiplane," Sybil said, kicking sand. "Not in my face , baby," the young man said, putting his hand on Sybil's ankle . "Well, it's about time he got he re , your daddy. I've been expecting him hourly. Hourly." "Where's the lady?" Sybil said. "The lady?" the young man brushed some sand out of his thin hair. "That's hard to say, Sybil. She may be in any one of a thousand place s. At the hairdre sser's. Having he r hair dye d mink. Or making dolls for poor childre n, in her room." Lying prone now, he made two fists, set one on top of the othe r, and rested his chin on the top one . "Ask me something else, Sybil," he said. "That's a fine bathing suit you have on. If there's one thing I like, it's a blue bathing suit." Sybil stared at him, then looked down at her protruding stomach. "This is a yellow," she said. "This is a yellow."

[6]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "It is? Come a little close r." Sybil took a ste p forward. "You're absolutely right. What a fool I am." "Are you going in the wate r?" Sybil said. "I'm seriously considering it. I'm giving it plenty of thought, Sybil, you'll be glad to know." Sybil prodded the rubbe r float that the young man sometimes used as a head-rest. "It needs air," she said. "You're right. It needs more air than I'm willing to admit." He took away his fists and let his chin rest on the sand. "Sybil," he said, "you're looking fine . It's good to see you. Te ll me about yourse lf." He reached in front of him and took both of Sybil's ankles in his hands. "I'm Capricorn," he said. "What are you?" "Sharon L ipschutz said you le t he r sit on the piano seat with you," Sybil said. "Sharon L ipschutz said that?" Sybil nodde d vigorously. He let go of her ankles, drew in his hands, and laid the side of his face on his right forearm. "Well," he said, "you know how those things happen, Sybil. I was sitting there, playing. And you were nowhere in sight. And Sharon Lipschutz came over and sat down next to me. I couldn't push he r off, could I?" "Yes." "Oh, no. No. I couldn't do that," said the young man. "I'll tell you what I did do, though." "What?" "I pretended she was you." Sybil immediately stooped and be gan to dig in the sand. "Let's go in the water," she said. "All right," said the young man. "I think I can work it in." "Next time, push her off," Sybil said. "Push who off?" "Sharon L ipschutz ." "Ah, Sharon Lipschutz ," said the young man. "How that name comes up. Mixing memory and desire ." He suddenly got to his feet. He looke d at the ocean. "Sybil," he said, "I'll tell you what we'll do. We'll see if we can catch a bananafish." "A what?" "A bananafish," he said, and undid the belt of his robe. He took off the robe. His shoulde rs we re white and narrow, and his trunks were royal blue. He folded the robe , first le ngthwise , then in thirds. He unrolled the towe l he had use d over his e yes, spread it out on the sand, and then laid the folded robe on top of it. He bent ove r, picked up the float, and secure d it under his right arm. Then, with his left hand, he took Sybil's hand. The two started to walk down to the ocean. "I imagine you've seen quite a few bananafish in your day," the young man said. Sybil shook her head. "You haven't? Whe re do you live , anyway?" "I don't know," said Sybil. "Sure you know. You must know. Sharon Lipschutz knows where she lives and she's only three and a half." Sybil stopped walking and yanked he r hand away from him. She picke d up an ordinary beach she ll and looked at it with elaborate inte re st. She threw it down. "Whirly Wood, Conne cticut," she said, and resumed walking, stomach foremost. "Whirly Wood, Connecticut," said the young man. "Is that anywhere near Whirly Wood, Conne cticut, by any chance?" Sybil looked at him. "That's where I live ," she said impatiently. "I live in Whirly Wood, Connecticut." She ran a few steps ahead of him, caught up her le ft foot in her le ft hand, and hopped two or three times. "You have no idea how clear that make s everything," the young man said. Sybil re leased he r foot. "Did you read `Little Black Sambo'?" she said.

[7]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "It's very funny you ask me that," he said. "It so happens I just finished re ading it last night." He reached down and took back Sybil's hand. "What did you think of it?" he asked her. "Did the tigers run all around that tree?" "I thought they'd never stop. I never saw so many tige rs." "There we re only six," Sybil said. "Only six!" said the young man. "Do you call that only?" "Do you like wax?" Sybil asked. "Do I like what?" asked the young man. "Wax." "Very much. Don't you?" Sybil nodde d. "Do you like olive s?" she asked. "Olive s--yes. Olives and wax. I neve r go anyplace without 'em." "Do you like Sharon Lipschutz?" Sybil aske d. "Yes. Yes, I do," said the young man. "What I like particularly about he r is that she ne ve r doe s anything mean to little dogs in the lobby of the hote l. That little toy bull that be longs to that lady from Canada, for instance . You probably won't belie ve this, but some little girls like to poke that little dog with balloon sticks. Sharon doesn't. She's ne ve r mean or unkind. That's why I like he r so much." Sybil was sile nt. "I like to chew candles," she said finally. "Who doesn't?" said the young man, getting his feet wet. "Wow! It's cold." He droppe d the rubbe r float on its back. "No, wait just a second, Sybil. Wait'll we get out a little bit." They waded out till the wate r was up to Sybil's waist. Then the young man picked he r up and laid her down on her stomach on the float. "Don't you ever wear a bathing cap or anything?" he aske d. "Don't let go," Sybil orde re d. "You hold me, now." "Miss Carpente r. Please. I know my business," the young man said. "You just keep your e yes open for any bananafish. This is a perfect day for bananafish." "I don't see any," Sybil said. "That's understandable. The ir habits are very peculiar." He kept pushing the float. The water was not quite up to his chest. "They lead a ve ry tragic life," he said. "You know what they do, Sybil?" She shook he r head. "We ll, the y swim into a hole where there's a lot of bananas. They're very ordinarylooking fish when they swim in. But once they get in, they be have like pigs. Why, I've known some bananafish to swim into a banana hole and eat as many as seventy-eight bananas." He edged the float and its passenger a foot closer to the horizon. "Naturally, after that they're so fat they can't get out of the hole again. Can't fit through the door." "Not too far out," Sybil said. "What happens to them?" "What happens to who?" "The bananafish." "Oh, you mean after they eat so many bananas they can't get out of the banana hole?" "Yes," said Sybil. "We ll, I hate to te ll you, Sybil. They die." "Why?" asked Sybil. "We ll, the y ge t banana fever. It's a terrible dise ase ." "Here come s a wave," Sybil said nervously. "We 'll ignore it. We 'll snub it," said the young man. "Two snobs." He took Sybil's ankles in his hands and pressed down and forward. The float nosed over the top of the wave. The wate r soaked Sybil's blond hair, but her scream was full of pleasure. With he r hand, when the float was leve l again, she wipe d away a flat, we t band of hair from he r eyes, and reporte d, "I just saw one." "Saw what, my love?" "A bananafish." "My God, no!" said the young man. "Did he have any bananas in his mouth?" "Yes," said Sybil. "Six."

[8]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger The young man suddenly picked up one of Sybil's wet feet, which we re drooping over the end of the float, and kissed the arch. "Hey!" said the owne r of the foot, turning around. "Hey, yourself We're going in now. You had e nough?" "No!" "Sorry," he said, and pushed the float toward shore until Sybil got off it. He carrie d it the re st of the way. "Goodbye ," said Sybil, and ran without regre t in the direction of the hote l. The young man put on his robe , closed the lapels tight, and jammed his towel into his pocket. He picked up the slimy wet, cumbe rsome float and put it unde r his arm. He plodded alone through the soft, hot sand toward the hotel. On the sub-main floor of the hote l, which the management directed bathe rs to use, a woman with zinc salve on her nose got into the e levator with the young man. "I see you're looking at my fee t," he said to her when the car was in motion. "I beg your pardon?" said the woman. "I said I see you're looking at my feet." "I beg your pardon. I happene d to be looking at the floor," said the woman, and faced the doors of the car. "If you want to look at my feet, say so," said the young man. "But don't be a Goddamned sneak about it." "Let me out here, ple ase ," the woman said quickly to the girl operating the car. The car doors opened and the woman got out without looking back. "I have two normal feet and I can't see the slightest God-damne d reason why anybody should stare at them," said the young man. "Five, please." He took his room key out of his robe pocket. He got off at the fifth floor, walked down the hall, and le t himse lf into 507. The room sme lle d of new calfskin luggage and nail-lacquer remover. He glanced at the girl lying asleep on one of the twin be ds. Then he went over to one of the pieces of luggage, opened it, and from under a pile of shorts and unde rshirts he took out an Ortgies calibre 7.65 automatic. He release d the magazine, looked at it, then reinse rted it. He cocke d the piece. Then he went ove r and sat down on the unoccupied twin bed, looked at the girl, aimed the pistol, and fired a bullet through his right temple.

[9]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut
IT WAS ALMOST THREE O'CLOCK whe n Mary J ane finally found Eloise's house. She explained to Eloise , who had come out to the driveway to meet her, that everything had been absolutely perfect, that she had remembe red the way exactly, until she had turne d off the Me rrick Parkway. Eloise said, "Me rritt Parkway, baby," and re minded Mary Jane that she had found the house twice before, but Mary Jane just waile d something ambiguous, something about her box of Kleenex, and rushed back to he r conve rtible. Eloise turned up the collar of her came l's-hair coat, put her back to the wind, and waited. Mary Jane was back in a minute using a leaf of Kleenex and still looking upset, even foule d. Eloise said cheerfully that the whole damn lunch was burned-sweetbreads, eve rything--but Mary Jane said she'd eaten anyway, on the road. As the two walked toward the house, Eloise asked Mary Jane how it happene d she had the day off. Mary Jane said she didn't have the whole day off; it was just that Mr. Weyinburg had a hernia and was home in Larchmont, and she had to bring him his mail and take a couple of le tters every afte rnoon. She asked Eloise , "Just exactly what is a hernia, anyway?" Eloise, dropping her cigarette on the soiled snow underfoot, said she didn't actually know but that Mary Jane didn't have to worry much about getting one. Mary Jane said, "Oh," and the two girls e ntered the house . Twenty minute s late r, they we re finishing their first highball in the living room and we re talking in the manne r peculiar, probably limite d, to forme r colle ge roommates. They had an even stronger bond be tween them; ne ither of them had graduated. Eloise had le ft college in the middle of her sophomore year, in 1942, a week after s he had been caught with a soldier in a closed ele vator on the third floor of her residence hall. Mary Jane had le ft--same year, same class, almost the same month--to marry an aviation cadet stationed in Jacksonville, Florida, a lean, air-minded boy from Dill, Mississippi, who had spent two of the three months Mary Jane had been married to him in jail for stabbing an M.P. "No," Eloise was saying. "It was actually red." She was stretched out on the couch, he r thin but very pre tty legs crossed at the ankle s. "I heard it was blond," Mary J ane repeated. She was seated in the blue straight chair. "Wuddayacallit swore up and down it was blond." "Uh-uh. De finitely." Eloise yawned. "I was almost in the room with her when she dyed it. What's the matter? Aren't the re any cigare ttes in there?" "It's all right. I have a whole pack," Mary Jane said. "Somewhere." She searched through her handbag. "That dopey maid," Eloise said without moving from the couch. "I dropped two brandne w cartons in front of her nose about an hour ago. She 'll be in, any minute , to ask me what to do with them. Where the he ll was I?" "Thieringer," Mary Jane prompted, lighting one of her own cigare ttes. "Oh, yeah. I remember exactly. She dyed it the night be fore she marrie d that Frank Henke . You remember him at all?" "Just sort of. Little ole private ? Te rribly unattractive ?" "Unattractive . God! He looked like an unwashed Bela Lugosi." Mary Jane threw back her head and roared. "Marvellous," she said, coming back into drinking position. "Gimme your glass," Eloise said, swinging he r stockinge d feet to the floor and standing up. "Honestly, that dope . I did e verything but get Le w to make love to he r to ge t he r to come out he re with us. Now I'm sorry I--Where'd you get that thing?" "This?" said Mary Jane, touching a cameo brooch at her throat. "I had it at school, for goodness sake. It was Mother's." "God," Eloise said, with the empty glasse s in her hands. "I don't have one damn thing holy to wear. If Lew's mothe r ever dies--ha, ha--she'll probably leave me some old monogrammed icepick or something." "How're you getting along with he r these days, anyway?" "Don't be funny," Eloise said on her way to the kitchen.

[ 10 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "This is positively the last one for me!" Mary Jane called after her. "Like he ll it is. Who called who? And who came two hours late? You're gonna stick around till I'm sick of you. The he ll with your lousy career." Mary Jane threw back her head and roared again, but Eloise had already gone into the kitchen. With little or no whe rewithal for being left alone in a room, Mary Jane stood up and walked over to the window. She drew aside the curtain and leane d her wrist on one of the crosspieces between panes, but, fee ling grit, she removed it, rubbe d it clean with he r other hand, and stood up more erectly. Outside, the filthy slush was visibly turning to ice. Mary Jane let go the curtain and wande re d back to the blue chair, passing two heavily stocked bookcases without glancing at any of the title s. Seated, she opened her handbag and used the mirror to look at he r teeth. She closed her lips and ran her tongue hard over her uppe r front teeth, then took another look. "It's getting so icy out," she said, turning. "God, that was quick. Didn't you put any soda in them?" Eloise , with a fresh drink in each hand, stopped short. She extended both index fingers, gun-muzzle style, and said, "Don't nobody move . I got the whole damn place surrounded." Mary Jane laughed and put away her mirror. Eloise came forward with the drinks. She placed Mary Jane 's insecure ly in its coaster but ke pt he r own in hand. She stretched out on the couch again. "Wuddaya think she's doing out the re?" she said. "She 's sitting on he r big, black butt reading `The Robe .' I dropped the ice trays taking them out. She actually looke d up annoyed." "This is my last. And I mean it," Mary Jane said, picking up her drink. "Oh, listen! You know who I saw last week? On the main floor of L ord & Taylor's?" "Mm-hm," said Eloise, adjusting a pillow unde r he r head. "Akim Tamiroff." "Who?" said Mary Jane. "Who's he?" "Akim Tamiroff. He 's in the movies. He always says, `You make beeg joke--hah?' I love him. . . . There isn't one damn pillow in this house that I can stand. Who'd you see?" "Jackson. She was--" "Which one?" "I don't know. The one that was in our Psych class, that always--" "Both of them we re in our Psych class." "We ll. The one with the terrific--" "Marcia L ouise. I ran into her once, too. She talk your ear off?" "God, yes. But you know what she told me , though? Dr. Whiting's de ad. She said she had a le tter from Barbara Hill saying Whiting got cancer last summe r and died and all. She only weighed sixty-two pounds. When she died. Isn't that terrible?" "No." "Eloise, you're ge tting hard as nails." "Mm. What else'd she say?" "Oh, she just got back from Europe . He r husband was statione d in Ge rmany or something, and she was with him. They had a forty-se ven-room house , she said, just with one othe r couple, and about ten servants. Her own horse, and the groom they had, used to be Hitler's own private riding master or something. Oh, and she starte d to tell me how she almost got rape d by a colored soldie r. Right on the main floor of L ord & Taylor's she started to te ll me--you know Jackson. She said he was he r husband's chauffeur, and he was driving her to market or something one morning. She said she was so scared she didn't e ven--" "Wait just a second." Eloise raised he r head and her voice . "Is that you, Ramona?" "Yes," a small child's voice answere d. "Close the front door after you, please," Eloise called. "Is that Ramona? Oh, I'm dying to see he r. Do you realize I haven't seen her since she had her--" "Ramona," Eloise shoute d, with her e yes shut, "go out in the kitchen and let Grace take your galoshes off." "All right," said Ramona. "C'mon, Jimmy."

[ 11 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "Oh, I'm dying to see her," Mary Jane said. "Oh, God! Look what I did. I'm te rribly sorry, El." "Leave it. Leave it," said Eloise. "I hate this damn rug anyway. I'll get you another." "No, look, I have more than half left!" Mary Jane held up he r glass. "Sure?" said Eloise . "Gimme a cigarette ." Mary Jane extende d her pack of cigarettes, saying "Oh, I'm dying to see her. Who does she look like now?" Eloise struck a light. "Akim Tamiroff." "No, seriously." "Lew. She looks like Le w. When his mother comes ove r, the three of them look like triplets." Without sitting up, Eloise reached for a stack of ashtrays on the far side of the cigare tte table. She successfully lifted off the top one and set it down on her stomach. "What I need is a cocker spaniel or something," she said. "Somebody that looks like me ." "How're her eye s now?" Mary Jane asked. "I mean they're not any worse or anything, are they?" "God! Not that I know of." "Can she see at all without he r glasse s? I mean if she gets up in the night to go to the john or something. "She won't te ll anybody. She's lousy with secrets." Mary Jane turne d around in he r chair. "Well, hello, Ramona!" she said. "Oh, what a pretty dre ss!" She set down her drink. "I'll be t you don't even remembe r me, Ramona." "Certainly she does. Who's the lady, Ramona?" "Mary J ane ," said Ramona, and scratche d herself. "Marvellous!" said Mary Jane. "Ramona, will you give me a little kiss?" "Stop that," Eloise said to Ramona. Ramona stopped scratching herself. "Will you give me a little kiss, Ramona?" Mary Jane asked again. "I don't like to kiss people." Eloise snorted, and aske d, "Where's J immy?" "He's he re." "Who's Jimmy?" Mary Jane asked Eloise. "Oh, God! He r beau. Goes where she goes. Does what she does. All very hoopla." "Really?" said Mary Jane enthusiastically. She leane d forward. "Do you have a beau, Ramona?" Ramona's e yes, behind thick, counter-myopia lenses, did not reflect even the smallest part of Mary Jane's e nthusiasm. "Mary J ane asked you a question, Ramona," Eloise said. Ramona inse rted a finge r into her small, broad nose . "Stop that," Eloise said. "Mary Jane asked you if you have a beau." "Yes," said Ramona, busy with he r nose. "Ramona," Eloise said. "Cut that out. But immediately." Ramona put he r hand down. "We ll, I think that's just wonderful," Mary Jane said. "What's his name? Will you tell me his name, Ramona? Or is it a big se cret?" "Jimmy," Ramona said. "Jimmy? Oh, I love the name Jimmy! Jimmy what, Ramona?" "Jimmy J imme reeno," said Ramona. "Stand still," said Eloise. "We ll! That's quite a name . Whe re is Jimmy? Will you te ll me, Ramona?" "Here," said Ramona. Mary Jane looked around, then looke d back at Ramona, smiling as provocatively as possible . "Here where, honey?" "Here," said Ramona. "I'm holding his hand." "I don't get it," Mary Jane said to Eloise , who was finishing her drink. "Don't look at me ," said Eloise . Mary Jane looked back at Ramona. "Oh, I see. Jimmy's just a make-believe little boy. Marve llous." Mary Jane leaned forward cordially. "How do you do, Jimmy?" she said.

[ 12 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "He won't talk to you," said Eloise . "Ramona, tell Mary J ane about Jimmy." "Tell her what?" "Stand up, please. . . . Tell Mary Jane how Jimmy looks." "He has green eyes and black hair." "What e lse?" "No mommy and no daddy." "What e lse?" "No freckles." "What e lse?" "A sword." "What e lse?" "I don't know," said Ramona, and began to scratch he rself again. "He sounds beautiful!" Mary Jane said, and leaned even farther forward in her chair. "Ramona. Tell me. Did Jimmy take off his galoshes, too, when you came in?" "He has boots," Ramona said. "Marvellous," Mary J ane said to Eloise. "You just think so. I ge t it all day long. Jimmy eats with her. Takes a bath with her. Sleeps with her. She sleeps way ove r to one side of the bed, so's not to roll ove r and hurt him." Looking absorbed and delighted with this information, Mary Jane took in he r lower lip, then released it to ask, "Where'd he get that name , though?" "Jimmy J imme reeno? God knows." "Probably from some little boy in the ne ighborhood." Eloise , yawning, shook he r head. "There are no little boys in the ne ighborhood. No children at all. They call me Fertile Fanny behind my--" "Mommy," Ramona said, "can I go out and play?" Eloise looked at he r. "You just came in," she said. "Jimmy wants to go out again." "Why, may I ask?" "He le ft his sword outside." "Oh, him and his goddam sword," Eloise said. "We ll. Go ahead. Put your galoshes back on." "Can I have this?" Ramona said, taking a burned match out of the ashtray. "May I have this. Yes. Stay out of the street, please." "Goodbye , Ramona!" Mary Jane said musically. "Bye," said Ramona. "C'mon, Jimmy." Eloise lunged suddenly to her feet. "Gimme your glass," she said. "No, really, El. I'm supposed to be in Larchmont. I mean Mr. Weyinburg's so sweet, I hate to--" "Call up and say you we re killed. Le t go of that damn glass." "No, honestly, El. I mean it's getting so te rribly icy. I have hardly any anti-freeze in the car. I mean if I don't--" "Let it freeze. Go phone. Say you're dead," said Eloise. "Gimme that." "We ll . . . Where's the phone?" "It went," said Eloise , carrying the empty glasses and walking toward the dining room, "--this-a-way." She stoppe d short on the floor board between the living room and the dining room and execute d a grind and a bump. Mary Jane giggle d. "I mean you didn't really know Walt," said Eloise at a quarter of five, lying on he r back on the floor, a drink balanced upright on her small-breasted chest. "He was the only boy I ever knew that could make me laugh. I mean really laugh." She looked ove r at Mary Jane. "You remembe r that night--our last year--whe n that craz y Louise He rmanson busted in the room wearing that black brassiere she bought in Chicago?" Mary Jane giggle d. She was lying on he r stomach on the couch, he r chin on the armrest, facing Eloise. Her drink was on the floor, within reach. "We ll, he could make me laugh that way," Eloise said. "He could do it whe n he talked to me. He could do it ove r the phone. He could e ven do it in a letter. And the best thing

[ 13 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger about it was that he didn't e ven try to be funny--he just was funny." She turned her head slightly toward Mary Jane . "Hey, how 'bout throwing me a cigarette?" "I can't reach 'e m," Mary Jane said. "Nuts to you." Eloise looked up at the ceiling again. "Once ," she said, "I fell down. I used to wait for him at the bus stop, right outside the PX, and he showe d up late once, just as the bus was pulling out. We started to run for it, and I fell and twisted my ankle. He said, `Poor Uncle Wiggily.' He meant my ankle. Poor old Uncle Wiggily, he calle d it. . . . God, he was nice." "Doesn't Lew have a sense of humor?" Mary Jane said. "What?" "Doesn't Lew have a sense of humor?" "Oh, God! Who knows? Yes. I gue ss so. He laughs at cartoons and stuff." Eloise raise d he r head, lifted her drink from he r chest, and drank from it. "We ll," Mary Jane said. "That isn't e verything. I mean that isn't e ve rything." "What isn't?" "Oh . . . you know. Laughing and stuff." "Who says it isn't?" Eloise said. "L isten, if you're not gonna be a nun or something, you might as well laugh." Mary Jane giggle d. "You're terrible," she said. "Ah, God, he was nice," Eloise said. "He was either funny or swee t. Not that damn little -boy sweet, e ither. It was a spe cial kind of sweet. You know what he did once?" "Uh-uh," Mary Jane said. "We were on the train going from Trenton to New York--it was just right afte r he was drafte d. It was cold in the car and I had my coat sort of over us. I remember I had Joyce Morrow's cardigan on underneath--you remember that darling blue cardigan she had?" Mary Jane nodded, but Eloise didn't look over to get the nod. "We ll, he sort of had his hand on my stomach. You know. Anyway, all of a sudden he said my stomach was so beautiful he wished some officer would come up and order him to stick his other hand through the window. He said he wanted to do what was fair. Then he took his hand away and told the conductor to throw his shoulders back. He told him if there was one thing he couldn't stand it was a man who didn't look proud of his uniform. The conductor just told him to go back to sleep." Eloise re flecte d a moment, then said, "It wasn't always what he said, but how he said it. You know." "Have you e ver told Lew about him--I mean, at all?" "Oh," Eloise said, "I started to, once . But the first thing he aske d me was what his rank was." "What was his rank?" "Ha!" said Eloise. "No, I just meant--" Eloise laughed suddenly, from he r diaphragm. "You know what he said once? He said he felt he was advancing in the Army, but in a different direction from everybody else . He said that whe n he'd get his first promotion, inste ad of getting stripe s he'd have his sleeves taken away from him. He said when he 'd get to be a gene ral, he'd be stark naked. All he 'd be wearing would be a little infantry button in his nave l." Eloise looke d over at Mary Jane, who wasn't laughing. "Don't you think that's funny?" "Yes. Only, why don't you te ll Lew about him sometime, though?" "Why? Be cause he's too damn uninte lligent, that's why," Eloise said. "Be sides. Listen to me, career girl. If you ever get marrie d again, don't te ll your husband anything. Do you hear me?" "Why?" said Mary Jane. "Because I say so, that's why," said Eloise. "They wanna think you spe nt your whole life vomiting every time a boy came near you. I'm not kidding, e ithe r. Oh, you can tell them stuff. But neve r honestly. I mean never honestly. If you te ll 'em you once knew a handsome boy, you gotta say in the same breath he was too handsome. And if you te ll 'em you knew a witty boy, you gotta tell 'em he was kind of a smart ale ck, though, or a wise guy. If you don't, they hit you over the head with the poor boy eve ry time they get a chance." Eloise paused to drink from her glass and to think. "Oh," she said, "they'll

[ 14 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger liste n very maturely and all that. They'll even look intelligent as he ll. But don't let it fool you. Belie ve me . You'll go through he ll if you eve r give 'e m any credit for inte lligence. Take my word." Mary Jane, looking depressed, raised her chin from the armrest of the couch. For a change, she supported her chin on her forearm. She thought ove r Eloise 's advice. "You can't call Le w not intelligent," she said aloud. "Who can't?" "I mean isn't he intelligent?" Mary Jane said innocently. "Oh," said Eloise, "what's the use of talking? Let's drop it. I'll just depress you. Shut me up." "We ll, wudga marry him for, then?" Mary J ane said. "Oh, God! I don't know. He told me he love d Jane Austen. He told me he r books meant a great deal to him. That's exactly what he said. I found out after we were married that he hadn't e ven read one of he r books. You know who his favorite author is?" Mary Jane shook her head. "L. Manning Vines. Ever hear of him?" "Uh-uh." "Neither did I. Ne ithe r did anybody else . He wrote a book about four men that starved to death in Alaska. Lew doesn't remembe r the name of it, but it's the most beautifully written book he's e ve r read. Christ! He isn't e ven hone st e nough to come right out and say he liked it be cause it was about four guys that starved to death in an igloo or something. He has to say it was beautifully written." "You're too critical," Mary Jane said. "I mean you're too critical. Maybe it was a good-" "Take my word for it, it couldn't've been," Eloise said. She thought for a moment, then added, "At least, you have a job. I mean at least you--" "But listen, though," said Mary Jane. "Do you think you'll e ve r te ll him Walt was kille d, e ven? I mean he wouldn't be jealous, would he, if he knew Walt was--you know. Kille d and everything." "Oh, lover! You poor, innocent little caree r girl," said Eloise. "He'd be worse. He'd be a ghoul. L isten. All he knows is that I went around with somebody name d Walt--some wise cracking G.I. The last thing I'd do would be to tell him he was kille d. But the last thing. And if I did--which I wouldn't--but if I did, I'd te ll him he was kille d in action." Mary Jane pushed her chin farther forward over the e dge of he r forearm. "El. . ." she said. "Why won't you tell me how he was killed? I swear I won't tell anybody. Honestly. Please ." "No." "Please. Honestly. I won't tell anybody." Eloise finished her drink and re placed the empty glass upright on he r chest. "You'd tell Akim Tamiroff," she said. "No, I wouldn't! I mean I wouldn't tell any--" "Oh," said Eloise, "his regiment was resting someplace. It was between battles or something, this friend of his said that wrote me. Walt and some othe r boy were putting this little Japanese stove in a package. Some colone l wanted to send it home. Or they we re taking it out of the package to rewrap it--I don't know exactly. Anyway, it was all full of gasoline and junk and it explode d in the ir faces. The other boy just lost an eye." Eloise began to cry. She put her hand around the empty glass on her chest to steady it. Mary Jane slid off the couch and, on her knees, took three steps ove r to Eloise and be gan to stroke her forehead. "Don't cry, El. Don't cry." "Who's crying?" Eloise said. "I know, but don't. I mean it isn't worth it or anything. The front door opene d. "That's Ramona back," Eloise said nasally. "Do me a favor. Go out in the kitchen and tell whosis to give he r he r dinne r early. Willya?" "All right, if you promise not to cry, though." "I promise. Go on. I don't feel like going out to that damn kitchen right this minute."

[ 15 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Mary Jane stood up, losing and recovering her balance, and left the room. She was back in le ss than two minutes, with Ramona running ahead of her. Ramona ran as flatfoote d as possible , trying to get the maximum noise out of her open galoshes. "She wouldn't let me take her galoshes off," Mary Jane said. Eloise , still lying on he r back on the floor, was using he r handke rchief. She spoke into it, addressing Ramona. "Go out and tell Grace to take your galoshe s off. You know you're not suppose d to come into the--" "She's in the lavatory," Ramona said. Eloise put away he r handke rchief and hoiste d herse lf to a sitting position. "Gimme your foot," she said. "Sit down, first, please . . . . Not the re --he re . God!" On he r knees, looking unde r the table for he r cigarettes, Mary Jane said, "Hey. Guess what happened to Jimmy." "No idea. Other foot. Other foot." "He got runned ove r," said Mary Jane . "Isn't that tragic?" "I saw Skippe r with a bone," Ramona told Eloise. "What happene d to J immy?" Eloise said to her. "He got runned ove r and killed. I saw Skippe r with a bone , and he wouldn't--" "Gimme your forehead a second," Eloise said. She reached out and felt Ramona's forehead. "You feel a little fe ve rish. Go tell Grace you're to have your dinne r upstairs. Then you're to go straight to bed. I'll be up late r. Go on, now, please. Take these with you." Ramona slowly giant-ste pped her way out of the room. "Throw me one ," Eloise said to Mary Jane. "Let's have anothe r drink." Mary Jane carrie d a cigarette over to Eloise. "Isn't that something? About Jimmy? What an imagination!" "Mm. You go ge t the drinks, huh? And bring the bottle . . . I don't wanna go out the re . The whole damn place smells like orange juice ." At five minutes past se ven, the phone rang. Eloise got up from the window seat and felt in the dark for her shoes. She couldn't find them. In her stocking fee t, she walked steadily, almost languidly, toward the phone . The ringing didn't disturb Mary Jane, who was asleep on the couch, face down. "Hello," Eloise said into the phone, without having turned the overhead light on. "Look, I can't meet you. Mary Jane's he re . She's got her car parked right in front of me and she can't find the key. I can't get out. We spent about twenty minutes looking for it in the wuddayacallit--the snow and stuff. Maybe you can ge t a lift with Dick and Mildre d." She listene d. "Oh. Well, that's tough, kid. Why don't you boys form a platoon and march home? You can say that but-hopehoop-hoop business. You can be the big shot." She listene d again. "I'm not funny," she said. "Really, I'm not. It's just my face." She hung up. She walked, less steadily, back into the living room. At the window seat, she poured what was le ft in the bottle of Scotch into her glass. It made about a finge r. She drank it off, shivered, and sat down. Whe n Grace turned on the light in the dining room, Eloise jumped. Without getting up, she called in to Grace, "You bette r not se rve until eight, Grace. Mr. We ngler'll be a little late." Grace appeared in the dining-room light but didn't come forward. "The lady go?" she said. "She's resting." "Oh," said Grace. "Miz Wengle r, I wondered if it'd be all right if my husband passe d the evenin' here. I got plentya room in my room, and he don't have to be back in Ne w York till tomorrow mornin', and it's so bad out." "Your husband? Where is he?" "We ll, right now," Grace said, "he's in the kitchen." "We ll, I'm afraid he can't spend the night here, Grace." "Ma'am?" "I say I'm afraid he can't spend the night here. I'm not running a hotel."

[ 16 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Grace stood for a moment, then said, "Yes, Ma'am," and went out to the kitchen. Eloise left the living room and climbe d the stairs, which we re lighted very faintly by the overglow from the dining room. One of Ramona's galoshes was lying on the landing. Eloise picked it up and threw it, with as much force as possible , over the side of the banister; it struck the foye r floor with a viole nt thump. She snapped on the light in Ramona's room and held on to the switch, as if for support. She stood still for a moment looking at Ramona. Then she let go of the light switch and went quickly ove r to the bed. "Ramona. Wake up. Wake up." Ramona was slee ping far over on one side of the bed, her right buttock off the e dge. He r glasses were on a little Donald Duck night table , folded neatly and laid stems down. "Ramona!" The child awoke with a sharp intake of breath. He r eyes opened wide , but she narrowe d them almost at once. "Mommy?" "I thought you told me J immy J imme reeno was run ove r and killed." "What?" "You heard me," Eloise said. "Why are you slee ping way ove r here?" "Because," said Ramona. "Because why? R amona, I don't feel like--" "Because I don't want to hurt Mickey." "Who?" "Mickey," said Ramona, rubbing he r nose. "Mickey Mickeranno." Eloise raise d her voice to a shriek. "You get in the cente r of that bed. Go on." Ramona, extremely frightened, just looked up at Eloise. "All right." Eloise grabbe d Ramona's ankles and half lifted and half pulled her over to the middle of the bed. Ramona ne ithe r struggled nor cried; she le t he rse lf be moved without actually submitting to it. "Now go to slee p," Eloise said, breathing heavily. "Close your eyes.... You heard me, close them." Ramona closed her e yes. Eloise we nt ove r to the light switch and flicked it off. But she stood for a long time in the doorway. Then, suddenly, she rushed, in the dark, over to the night table, banging he r knee against the foot of the bed, but too full of purpose to fee l pain. She picke d up Ramona's glasses and, holding them in both hands, pre ssed them against her chee k. Te ars rolled down he r face , wetting the le nse s. "Poor Uncle Wiggily," she said over and over again. Finally, she put the glasses back on the night table, lenses down. She stooped over, losing her balance, and began to tuck in the blankets of Ramona's be d. Ramona was awake . She was crying and had been crying. Eloise kissed he r wetly on the mouth and wiped the hair out of he r eyes and then left the room. She went downstairs, staggering now very badly, and wakene d Mary Jane . "Wuzzat? Who? Huh?" said Mary Jane, sitting bolt upright on the couch. "Mary J ane . Listen. Please ," Eloise said, sobbing. "You remember our fre shman year, and I had that brawn-and-yellow dress I bought in Boise, and Miriam Ball told me nobody wore those kind of dre sse s in New York, and I crie d all night?" Eloise shook Mary Jane's arm. "I was a nice girl," she pleaded, "wasn't I?"

[ 17 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

Just Before the War with the Eskimos
FIVE STRAIGHT SATURDAY MOR NINGS, Ginnie Mannox had played tennis at the East Side Courts with Selena Graff, a classmate at Miss Basehoar's. Ginnie openly considere d Selena the biggest drip at Miss Basehoar's--a school ostensibly abounding with fair-sized drips--but at the same time she had ne ver known anyone like Se lena for bringing fresh cans of te nnis balls. Sele na's father made them or some thing. (At dinner one night, for the edification of the entire Mannox family, Ginnie had conjured up a vision of dinner over at the Graffs'; it involved a pe rfect se rvant coming around to everyone's left with, instead of a glass of tomato juice, a can of te nnis balls.) But this business of dropping Selena off at her house after tennis and the n getting stuck--every single time--for the whole cab fare was ge tting on Ginnie's ne rves. Afte r all, taking the taxi home from the courts instead of the bus had been Se le na's idea. On the fifth Saturday, however, as the cab started north in York Avenue, Ginnie suddenly spoke up. "Hey, Sele na. . ." "What?" asked Selena, who was busy feeling the floor of the cab with her hand. "I can't find the cover to my racket!" she moaned. Despite the warm May weathe r, both girls were wearing topcoats ove r their shorts. "You put it in your pocket," Ginnie said. "Hey, listen--" "Oh, God! You've saved my life!" "Listen," said Ginnie , who wanted no part of Selena's gratitude. "What?" Ginnie decide d to come right out with it. The cab was nearly at Selena's street. "I don't feel like getting stuck for the whole cab fare again today," she said. "I'm no millionaire, ya know." Se le na looked first amazed, then hurt. "Don't I always pay half?" she aske d innocently. "No," said Ginnie flatly. "You paid half the first Saturday. Way in the beginning of last month. And since then not even once . I don't wanna be ratty, but I'm actually existing on four-fifty a week. And out of that I have to--" "I always bring the tennis balls, don't I?" Selena asked unpleasantly. Sometimes Ginnie fe lt like killing Selena. "Your father makes them or something," she said. "They don't cost you anything. I have to pay for e very single little--" "All right, all right," Se lena said, loudly and with finality enough to give he rself the upper hand. Looking bored, she went through the pockets of her coat. "I only have thirty-five cents," she said coldly. "Is that e nough?" "No. I'm sorry, but you owe me a dollar sixty-five . I've been keeping track of every--" "I'll have to go upstairs and ge t it from my mother. Can't it wait till Monday? I could bring it to gym with me if it'd make you happy." Se le na's attitude defied clemency. "No," Ginnie said. "I have to go to the movies tonight. I need it." In hostile silence , the girls stare d out of opposite windows until the cab pulled up in front of Selena's apartment house . Then Se lena, who was seated nearest the curb, let he rself out. Just barely leaving the cab door open, she walked briskly and obliviously, like visiting Hollywood royalty, into the building. Ginnie , he r face burning, paid the fare. She then collected her te nnis things--racke t, hand towe l, and sun hat--and followed Se le na. At fifteen, Ginnie was about five feet nine in her 9 -B tennis shoe s, and as she ente red the lobby, he r se lf-conscious rubber-soled awkwardness lent her a dange rous amateur quality. It made Se lena prefe r to watch the indicator dial over the e le vator. "That makes a dollar ninety you owe me," Ginnie said, striding up to the e le vator. Se le na turned. "It may just inte rest you to know," she said, "that my mother is ve ry ill." "What's the matter with her?" "She virtually has pneumonia, and if you think I'm going to enjoy disturbing he r just for money . . ." Selena delive re d the incomple te sentence with all possible aplomb.

[ 18 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Ginnie was, in fact, slightly put off by this information, whatever its degree of truth, but not to the point of sentimentality. "I didn't give it to her," she said, and followed Se le na into the elevator. Whe n Selena had rung he r apartment be ll, the girls were admitte d--or rathe r, the door was drawn in and left ajar--by a colored maid with whom Selena didn't seem to be on speaking terms. Ginnie dropped her tennis things on a chair in the foyer and followed Selena. In the living room, Selena turned and said, "Do you mind waiting he re? I may have to wake Mothe r up and everything." "O.K.," Ginnie said, and plopped down on the sofa. "I never in my life would've thought you could be so small about anything," said Se le na, who was just angry enough to use the word "small" but not quite brave enough to emphasize it. "Now you know," said Ginnie, and opened a copy of Vogue in front of her face. She ke pt it in this position till Se lena had le ft the room, then put it back on top of the radio. She looked around the room, mentally rearranging furniture, throwing out table lamps, removing artificial flowers. In he r opinion, it was an altogethe r hideous room--expensive but cheesy. Suddenly, a male voice shouted from anothe r part of the apartment, "Eric? That you?" Ginnie guessed it was Selena's brother, whom she had never seen. She crosse d her long legs, arranged the hem of her polo coat over he r knees, and waited. A young man wearing glasses and pajamas and no slippers lunged into the room with his mouth open. "Oh. I thought it was Eric, for Chrissake ," he said. Without stopping, and with extreme ly poor posture, he continued across the room, cradling something close to his narrow chest. He sat down on the vacant end of the sofa. "I just cut my goddam finge r," he said rather wildly. He looked at Ginnie as if he had expected her to be sitting the re . "Eve r cut your finger? Right down to the bone and all?" he asked. There was a real appeal in his noisy voice , as if Ginnie, by her answer, could save him from some particularly isolating form of pioneering. Ginnie stared at him. "Well, not right down to the bone," she said, "but I've cut myself." He was the funnie st-looking boy, or man--it was hard to te ll which he was--she had eve r seen. His hair was bed-dishevelled. He had a couple of days' growth of sparse, blond beard. And he looke d-well, goofy. "How did you cut it?" she aske d. He was staring down, with his slack mouth ajar, at his injure d finger. "What?" he said. "How did you cut it?" "Goddam if I know," he said, his infle ction implying that the answe r to that question was hopelessly obscure. "I was lookin' for something in the goddam wastebaske t and it was fulla razor blades." "You Se lena's brothe r?" Ginnie asked. "Yeah. Christ, I'm bleedin' to death. Stick around. I may need a goddam transfusion." "Did you put anything on it?" Se le na's brothe r carrie d his wound slightly forward from his chest and unve iled it for Ginnie's bene fit. "Just some goddam toile t paper," he said. "Stopsa bleeding. L ike when you cut yourself shaving." He looked at Ginnie again. "Who are you?" he asked. "Friend of the je rk's?" "We 're in the same class." "Yeah? What's your name?" "Virginia Mannox." "You Ginnie?" he said, squinting at her through his glasses. "You Ginnie Mannox?" "Yes," said Ginnie, uncrossing her legs. Se le na's brothe r turne d back to his finge r, obviously for him the true and only focal point in the room. "I know your sister," he said dispassionate ly. "Goddam snob." Ginnie arched he r back. "Who is?" "You heard me." "She is not a snob!" "The he ll she's not," said Selena's brother.

[ 19 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "She is not!" "The he ll she's not. She's the queen. Queen of the goddam snobs." Ginnie watched him le ft up and pee r under the thick folds of toilet paper on his finger. "You don't even know my sister." "Hell I don't." "What's her name? What's her first name?" Ginnie demanded. "Joan. . . . Joan the Snob." Ginnie was sile nt. "What's she look like?" she asked suddenly. No answe r. "What's she look like ?" Ginnie repeated. "If she was half as good-looking as she thinks she is, she'd be goddam lucky," Se le na's brothe r said. This had the stature of an interesting answe r, in Ginnie 's secre t opinion. "I never heard he r mention you," she said. "That worries me . That worries he ll outa me." "Anyway, she 's engage d," Ginnie said, watching him. "She's gonna be married next month." "Who to?" he asked, looking up. Ginnie took full advantage of his having looked up. "Nobody you know." He resumed picking at his own first-aid work. "I pity him," he said. Ginnie snorted. "It's still b leedin' like mad. Ya think I oughta put something on it? What's good to put on it? Mercurochrome any good?" "Iodine's better," Ginnie said. Then, fee ling her answe r was too civil under the circumstance s, she adde d, "Mercurochrome's no good at all for that." "Why not? What's the matte r with it?" "It just isn't any good for that stuff, that's all. Ya need iodine." He looked at Ginnie. "It stings a lot, though, doesn't it?" he asked. "Doesn't it sting a he lluva lot?" "It stings," Ginnie said, "but it won't kill you or anything." Apparently without resenting Ginnie's tone , Se lena's brothe r turned back to his finger. "I don't like it when it stings," he said. "Nobody does." He nodded in agreement. "Yeah," he said. Ginnie watched him for a minute. "Stop touching it," she said suddenly. As though responding to an electric shock, Selena's brother pulle d back his uninjure d hand. He sat up a trifle straighter--or rather, slumped a trifle less. He looked at some obje ct on the other side of the room. An almost dreamy expression came ove r his disorderly features. He inserte d the nail of his uninjured index finger into the crevice be tween two front teeth and, removing a food particle, turned to Ginnie. "Jeat je t?" he asked. "What?" "Jeat lunch yet?" Ginnie shook her head. "I'll eat when I get home," she said. "My mothe r always has lunch ready for me when I get home." "I got a half a chicken sandwich in my room. Ya want it? I didn't touch it or anything." "No, thank you. Really." "You just playe d tennis, for Chrissake. Aren'tcha hungry?" "It isn't that," said Ginnie, crossing her legs. "It's just that my mothe r always has lunch ready when I get home. She goes insane if I'm not hungry, I mean." Se le na's brothe r seemed to acce pt this explanation. At least, he nodde d and looke d away. But he turned back suddenly. "How 'bout a glassa milk?" he said. "No, thanks.... Thank you, though." Absently, he bent over and scratched his bare ankle . "What's the name of this guy she's marrying?" he asked. "Joan, you mean?" said Ginnie. "Dick He ffne r."

[ 20 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Se le na's brothe r went on scratching his ankle. "He's a lieutenant commander in the Navy," Ginnie said. "Big deal." Ginnie giggled. She watched him scratch his ankle till it was re d. When he began to scratch off a minor skin eruption on his calf with his fingernail, she stopped watching. "Where do you know Joan from?" she asked. "I neve r saw you at the house or anything." "Never been at your goddam house." Ginnie waited, but nothing led away from this statement. "Whe re'd you meet he r, then?" she asked. "Party," he said. "At a party? When?" "I don't know. Christmas, '42." From his breast pajama pocket he two-fingered out a cigare tte that looke d as though it had been slept on. "How 'bout throwing me those matches?" he said. Ginnie handed him a box of matches from the table beside her. He lit his cigarette without straightening out its curvature, then re placed the used match in the box. Tilting his head back, he slowly re le ased an enormous quantity of smoke from his mouth and drew it up through his nostrils. He continued to smoke in this "Frenchinhale " style. Very probably, it was not part of the sofa vaudeville of a showoff but, rather, the private, expose d achievement of a young man who, at one time or another, might have trie d shaving himself lefthande d. "Why's Joan a snob?" Ginnie asked. "Why? Be cause she is. How the hell do I know why?" "Yes, but I mean why do you say she is?" He turned to her wearily. "Listen. I wrote her e ight goddam le tters. Eight. She didn't answe r one of 'em." Ginnie hesitate d. "Well, maybe she was busy." "Yeah. Busy. Busy as a little goddam beaver." "Do you have to swear so much?" Ginnie asked. "Goddam right I do." Ginnie giggled. "How long did you know he r, anyway?" she asked. "Long enough." "We ll, I mean did you ever phone her up or anything? I mean didn't you ever phone he r up or anything?" "Naa." "We ll, my gosh. If you never phoned he r up or any--" "I couldn't, for Chrissake!" "Why not?" said Ginnie. "Wasn't in Ne w York." "Oh! Whe re were you?" "Me? Ohio." "Oh, we re you in college?" "Nope . Quit." "Oh, we re you in the Army?" "Nope ." With his cigare tte hand, Selena's brother tapped the left side of his chest. "Ticke r," he said. "Your heart, ya mean?" Ginnie said. "What's the matter with it?" "I don't know what the hell's the matter with it. I had rheumatic feve r when I was a kid. Goddam pain in the --" "We ll, are n't you supposed to stop smoking? I mean aren't you supposed to not smoke and all? The doctor told my--" "Aah, they tellya a lotta stuff," he said. Ginnie brie fly held her fire . Ve ry briefly. "What were you doing in Ohio?" she aske d. "Me? Working in a goddam airplane factory." "You we re?" said Ginnie. "Did you like it?" "'Did you like it?'" he mimicked. "I loved it. I just adore airplanes. They're so cute."

[ 21 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Ginnie was much too involved now to fee l affronte d. "How long did you work the re? In the airplane factory." "I don't know, for Chrissake . Thirty-seven months." He stood up and walked over to the window. He looked down at the street, scratching his spine with his thumb. "Look at 'em," he said. "Goddam fools." "Who?" said Ginnie. "I don't know. Anybody." "Your finger'll start bleeding more if you hold it down that way," Ginnie said. He heard her. He put his left foot up on the window seat and re sted his injured hand on the horizontal thigh. He continued to look down at the street. "They're all goin' ove r to the goddam draft board," he said. "We're gonna fight the Eskimos next. Know that?" "The who?" said Ginnie. "The Eskimos.... Open your ears, for Chrissake." "Why the Eskimos?" "I don't know why. How the hell should I know why? This time all the old guys're gonna go. Guys around sixty. Nobody can go unless they're around sixty," he said. "Just give 'e m shorter hours is all. ... Big deal." "You wouldn't have to go, anyway," Ginnie said, without meaning anything but the truth, yet knowing before the statement was comple te ly out that she was saying the wrong thing. "I know," he said quickly, and took his foot down from the window seat. He raised the window slightly and snapped his cigare tte streetward. Then he turne d, finishe d at the window. "Hey. Do me a favor. When this guy comes, willya tell him I'll be ready in a coupla seconds? I just gotta shave is all. O.K.?" Ginnie nodded. "Ya want me to hurry Se lena up or anything? She know you're here?" "Oh, she knows I'm he re ," Ginnie said. "I'm in no hurry. Thank you." Se le na's brothe r nodded. Then he took a last, long look at his injured finger, as if to see whe ther it was in condition to make the trip back to his room. "Why don't you put a Band-Aid on it? Don't you have any Band-Aid or anything?" "Naa," he said. "We ll. Take it easy." He wandered out of the room. In a fe w seconds, he was back, bringing the sandwich half. "Eat this," he said. "It's good." "Really, I'm not at all--" "Take it, for Chrissake . I didn't poison it or anything." Ginnie accepted the sandwich half. "Well, thank you very much," she said. "It's chicken," he said, standing ove r he r, watching he r. "Bought it last night in a goddam delicatessen." "It looks very good." "We ll, eat it, then." Ginnie took a bite. "Good, huh?" Ginnie swallowed with difficulty. "Very," she said. Se le na's brothe r nodded. He looked absently around the room, scratching the pit of his chest. "Well, I guess I better get dressed.... Jesus! The re 's the bell. Take it easy, now!" He was gone . Le ft alone , Ginnie looked around, without getting up, for a good place to throw out or hide the sandwich. She heard someone coming through the foyer. She put the sandwich into her polo-coat pocket. A young man in his early thirtie s, neither short nor tall, came into the room. His regular features, his short haircut, the cut of his suit, the patte rn of his foulard necktie gave out no really final information. He might have been on the staff, or trying to get on the staff, of a news magazine. He might have just been in a play that closed in Philadelphia. He might have been with a law firm. "Hello," he said, cordially, to Ginnie . "Hello." "Seen Franklin?" he asked. "He's shaving. He told me to tell you to wait for him. He 'll be right out."

[ 22 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "Shaving. Good heavens." The young man looked at his wristwatch. He then sat down in a re d damask chair, crossed his legs, and put his hands to his face. As if he we re ge nerally weary, or had just unde rgone some form of eyestrain, he rubbed his closed eyes with the tips of his extended fingers. "This has been the most horrible morning of my entire life," he said, removing his hands from his face. He spoke exclusively from the larynx, as if he were altogethe r too tired to put any diaphragm breath into his words. "What happene d?" Ginnie asked, looking at him. "Oh. . . . It's too long a story. I neve r bore people I haven't known for at least a thousand years." He stared vague ly, discontentedly, in the dire ction of the windows. "But I shall never again conside r myself e ven the remotest judge of human nature . You may quote me wildly on that." "What happene d?" Ginnie repeate d. "Oh, God. This person who's been sharing my apartment for months and months and months--I don't e ven want to talk about him.... This write r," he added with satisfaction, probably remembering a favorite anathema from a Hemingway novel. "What'd he do?" "Frankly, I'd just as soon not go into details," said the young man. He took a cigare tte from his own pack, ignoring a transparent humidor on the table, and lit it with his own lighter. His hands were large. They looked ne ither strong nor competent nor sensitive . Ye t he used them as if they had some not easily controllable aesthetic drive of the ir own. "I've made up my mind that I'm not eve n going to think about it. But I'm just so furious," he said. "I mean he re's this awful little pe rson from Altoona, Pe nnsylvania--or one of those places. Apparently starving to death. I'm kind and decent enough--I'm the original Good Samaritan--to take him into my apartment, this absolutely microscopic little apartment that I can hardly move around in myself. I introduce him to all my friends. Let him clutter up the whole apartment with his horrible manuscript papers, and cigarette butts, and radishe s, and whatnot. Introduce him to e very theatrical produce r in New York. Haul his filthy shirts back and forth from the laundry. And on top of it all--" The young man broke off. "And the result of all my kindness and de cency," he went on, "is that he walks out of the house at five or six in the morning-without so much as leaving a note be hind--taking with him anything and everything he can lay his filthy, dirty hands on." He paused to drag on his cigarette , and exhaled the smoke in a thin, sibilant stream from his mouth. "I don't want to talk about it. I really don't." He looked ove r at Ginnie . "I love your coat," he said, already out of his chair. He crossed ove r and took the lapel of Ginnie 's polo coat between his fingers. "It's love ly. It's the first really good camel's hair I've seen since the war. May I ask whe re you got it?" "My mother brought it back from Nassau." The young man nodde d thoughtfully and backed off toward his chair. "It's one of the few places where you can ge t really good came l's hair." He sat down. "Was she there long?" "What?" said Ginnie. "Was your mothe r there long? The reason I ask is my mother was down in December. And part of January. Usually I go down with her, but this has been such a messy year I simply couldn't get away." "She was down in February," Ginnie said. "Grand. Where did she stay? Do you know?" "With my aunt." He nodded. "May I ask your name? You're a friend of Franklin's siste r, I take it?" "We 're in the same class," Ginnie said, answering only his second question. "You're not the famous Maxine that Selena talks about, are you?" "No," Ginnie said. The young man suddenly began brushing the cuffs of his trousers with the flat of his hand. "I am dog hairs from head to foot," he said. "Mother went to Washington over the weekend and parked her beast in my apartment. It's really quite sweet. But such nasty habits. Do you have a dog?" "No."

[ 23 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "Actually, I think it's cruel to keep them in the city." He stopped brushing, sat back, and looked at his wristwatch again. "I have neve r known that boy to be on time. We 're going to see Cocteau's 'Beauty and the Beast' and it's the one film whe re you really should get there on time . I mean if you don't, the whole charm of it is gone. Have you seen it?" "No." "Oh, you must! I've seen it e ight times. It's absolutely pure genius," he said. "I've been trying to get Franklin to see it for months." He shook his head hopelessly. "His taste. During the war, we both worked at the same horrible place, and that boy would insist on dragging me to the most impossible pictures in the world. We saw gangster pictures, Weste rn pictures, musicals--" "Did you work in the airplane factory, too?" Ginnie asked. "God, yes. For years and years and years. Let's not talk about it, please." "You have a bad heart, too?" "Heavens, no. Knock wood." He rappe d the arm of his chair twice . "I have the constitution of--" As Selena e ntered the room, Ginnie stood up quickly and went to meet he r halfway. Se le na had change d from he r shorts to a dre ss, a fact that ordinarily would have annoyed Ginnie. "I'm sorry to've kept you waiting," Selena said insincerely, "but I had to wait for Mothe r to wake up.... He llo, Eric." "Hello, he llo!" "I don't want the money anyway," Ginnie said, keeping he r voice down so that she was heard only by Selena. "What?" "I've been thinking. I mean you bring the tennis balls and all, all the time. I forgot about that." "But you said that because I didn't have to pay for them--" "Walk me to the door," Ginnie said, leading the way, without saying goodbye to Eric. "But I thought you said you were going to the movie s tonight and you neede d the money and all!" Selena said in the foyer. "I'm too tire d," Ginnie said. She bent over and picked up he r tennis paraphe rnalia. "Listen. I'll give you a ring afte r dinne r. Are you doing anything special tonight? Maybe I can come ove r." Se le na stared and said, "O.K." Ginnie opened the front door and walked to the elevator. She rang the bell. "I met your brothe r," she said. "You did? Isn't he a character?" "What's he do, anyway?" Ginnie asked casually. "Does he work or something?" "He just quit. Daddy wants him to go back to colle ge, but he won't go." "Why won't he?" "I don't know. He says he's too old and all." "How old is he?" "I don't know. Twenty-four." The elevator doors opened. "I'll call you laterl" Ginnie said. Outside the building, she started to walk west to Lexington to catch the bus. Be tween Third and Lexington, she reached into he r coat pocket for her purse and found the sandwich half. She took it out and starte d to bring he r arm down, to drop the sandwich into the stree t, but instead she put it back into her pocke t. A fe w years before , it had taken her three days to dispose of the Easter chick she had found dead on the sawdust in the bottom of he r waste baske t.

[ 24 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

The Laughing Man
IN 1928, when I was nine, I belonge d, with maximum esprit de corps, to an organization known as the Comanche Club. Every schoolday afte rnoon at three o'clock, twenty-five of us Comanche s were picked up by our Chie f outside the boys' exit of P. S. 165, on 109th Street near Amsterdam Avenue. We then pushed and punched our way into the Chief's reconve rted commercial bus, and he drove us (according to his financial arrangement with our parents) over to Ce ntral Park. The rest of the afternoon, weathe r pe rmitting, we played football or soccer or base ball, de pending (very loosely) on the season. Rainy afternoons, the Chief invariably took us e ither to the Museum of Natural History or to the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Saturdays and most national holidays, the Chief picked us up early in the morning at our various apartment houses and, in his condemned-looking bus, drove us out of Manhattan into the comparatively wide open spaces of Van Cortlandt Park or the Palisades. If we had straight athle tics on our minds, we went to Van Cortlandt, whe re the playing fields were regulation size and whe re the opposing team didn't include a baby carriage or an irate old lady with a cane. If our Comanche hearts were set on camping, we went over to the Palisades and roughed it. (I re membe r ge tting lost one Saturday somewhe re on that tricky stretch of terrain be tween the Linit sign and the site of the weste rn end of the George Washington Bridge . I kept my head, though. I just sat down in the majestic shadow of a giant billboard and, howe ve r tearfully, opened my lunchbox for business, semi-confident that the Chie f would find me. The Chie f always found us.) In his hours of libe ration from the Comanches, the Chief was John Ge dsudski, of Staten Island. He was an extreme ly shy, gentle young man of twenty-two or -three, a law student at N.Y.U., and altogether a very memorable person. I won't attempt to assemble his many achievements and virtues he re . Just in passing, he was an Eagle Scout, an almost-All-America tackle of 1926, and it was known that he had been most cordially invited to try out for the New York Giants' baseball team. He was an impartial and unexcitable umpire at all our bedlam sporting e vents, a maste r fire builder and extinguishe r, and an e xpert, uncontemptuous first-aid man. Eve ry one of us, from the smallest hoodlum to the biggest, love d and respected him. The Chief's physical appearance in 1928 is still clear in my mind. If wishes we re inches, all of us Comanches would have had him a giant in no time. The way things go, though, he was a stocky five three or four--no more than that. His hair was blue-black, his hair-line extreme ly low, his nose was large and fleshy, and his torso was just about as long as his legs were. In his leathe r windbreake r, his shoulders were powerful, but narrow and sloping. At the time , however, it seemed to me that in the Chief all the most photogenic features of Buck J ones, Ken Maynard, and Tom Mix had been smoothly amalgamated. Every afte rnoon, when it got dark e nough for a losing team to have an excuse for missing a numbe r of infield popups or end-zone passe s, we Comanches re lie d heavily and selfishly on the Chie f's talent for storytelling. By that hour, we were usually an overheate d, irritable bunch, and we fought each other--either with our fists or our shrill voices--for the seats in the bus neare st the Chief. (The bus had two parallel rows of straw seats. The le ft row had three extra seats--the best in the bus--that e xtended as far forward as the driver's profile.) The Chief climbed into the bus only after we had settled down. Then he straddled his driver's seat backward and, in his reedy but modulated tenor voice, gave us the new installment of "The Laughing Man." Once he starte d narrating, our intere st never flagged. "The Laughing Man" was just the right story for a Comanche. It may even have had classic dimensions. It was a story that tended to sprawl all ove r the place , and ye t it remained e ssentially portable . You could always take it home with you and reflect on it while sitting, say, in the outgoing water in the bathtub. The only son of a wealthy missionary couple, the Laughing Man was kidnapped in infancy by Chine se bandits. When the wealthy missionary couple refused (from a

[ 25 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger religious conviction) to pay the ransom for their son, the bandits, signally piqued, placed the little fellow's head in a carpe nte r's vise and gave the appropriate leve r se ve ral turns to the right. The subje ct of this unique experience gre w into manhood with a hairless, pe can-shaped head and a face that feature d, instead of a mouth, an enormous oval cavity be low the nose. The nose itself consisted of two fle sh-se aled nostrils. In consequence, when the Laughing Man breathe d, the hideous, mirthless gap below his nose dilated and contracte d like (as I see it) some sort of monstrous vacuole . (The Chief de monstrated, rather than explaine d, the Laughing Man's respiration method.) Strange rs fainted dead away at the sight of the Laughing Man's horrible face. Acquaintances shunned him. Curiously enough, though, the bandits let him hang around their headquarte rs--as long as he kept his face cove re d with a pale -red gossamer mask made out of poppy pe tals. The mask not only spared the bandits the sight of their foster son's face, it also kept them sensible of his whe reabouts; under the circumstance s, he reeke d of opium. Every morning, in his extreme loneliness, the Laughing Man stole off (he was as graceful on his feet as a cat) to the de nse forest surrounding the bandits' hide out. There he befriended any number and specie s of animals: dogs, white mice, eagle s, lions, boa constrictors, wolve s. Moreover, he removed his mask and spoke to them, softly, melodiously, in the ir own tongues. They did not think him ugly. (It took the Chief a couple of months to get that far into the story. From there on in, he got more and more high-handed with his installme nts, entirely to the satisfaction of the Comanches.) The Laughing Man was one for keeping an ear to the ground, and in no time at all he had picked up the bandits' most valuable trade secrets. He didn't think much of them, though, and briskly se t up his own, more e ffective system. On a rather small scale at first, he began to free-lance around the Chinese countryside, robbing, highjacking, murdering whe n absolutely necessary. Soon his ingenious criminal me thods, coupled with his singular love of fair play, found him a warm place in the nation's heart. Strange ly enough, his foster parents (the bandits who had originally turne d his head toward crime ) we re about the last to ge t wind of his achievements. When they did, they we re insane ly jealous. They all single-file d past the Laughing Man's be d one night, thinking they had successfully doped him into a deep slee p, and stabbed at the figure under the covers with their machetes. The victim turned out to be the bandit chie f's mothe r--an unpleasant, haggling sort of pe rson. The e vent only whetted the bandits' taste for the Laughing Man's blood, and finally he was obliged to lock up the whole bunch of them in a deep but pleasantly decorated mausoleum. They escaped from time to time and gave him a certain amount of annoyance, but he re fused to kill them. (There was a compassionate side to the Laughing Man's character that just about drove me craz y.) Soon the Laughing Man was regularly crossing the Chinese border into Paris, France , whe re he enjoyed flaunting his high but modest genius in the face of Marcel Dufarge, the inte rnationally famous detective and witty consumptive . Dufarge and his daughte r (an exquisite girl, though something of a transvestite) became the Laughing Man's bitte rest e nemies. Time and again, they tried leading the Laughing Man up the garden path. For sheer sport, the Laughing Man usually we nt halfway with them, then vanished, often leaving no eve n faintly credible indication of his e scape method. Just now and then he poste d an incisive little farewell note in the Paris se werage system, and it was de livere d promptly to Dufarge 's boot. The Dufarges spent an enormous amount of time sloshing around in the Paris sewers. Soon the Laughing Man had amassed the largest pe rsonal fortune in the world. Most of it he contributed anonymously to the monks of a local monastery--humble ascetics who had de dicated the ir live s to raising Ge rman police dogs. What was left of his fortune, the Laughing Man converted into diamonds, which he lowered casually, in eme rald vaults, into the Black Sea. His personal wants were few. He subsisted exclusively on rice and e agle s' blood, in a tiny cottage with an underground gymnasium and shooting range , on the stormy coast of Tibet. Four blindly loyal confederates lived with him: a glib timber wolf named Black Wing, a lovable dwarf named Omba, a giant

[ 26 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Mongolian named Hong, whose tongue had been burned out by white men, and a gorgeous Eurasian girl, who, out of unrequited love for the Laughing Man and deep concern for his personal safety, sometimes had a pretty sticky attitude toward crime. The Laughing Man issue d his orders to the crew through a black silk screen. Not even Omba, the lovable dwarf, was permitted to see his face. I'm not saying I will, but I could go on for hours escorting the reader--forcibly, if ne cessary--back and forth across the Paris-Chinese borde r. I happen to re gard the Laughing Man as some kind of super-distinguished ancestor of mine --a sort of Robert E. Lee , say, with the ascribe d virtues held under wate r or blood. And this illusion is only a moderate one compared to the one I had in 1928, when I regarded myself not only as the Laughing Man's dire ct descendant but as his only legitimate living one. I was not e ven my parents' son in 1928 but a de vilishly smooth impostor, awaiting the ir slightest blunder as an excuse to move in--pre fe rably without violence, but not ne cessarily--to assert my true identity. As a precaution against breaking my bogus mothe r's heart, I planned to take her into my underworld employ in some undefined but appropriate ly regal capacity. But the main thing I had to do in 1928 was watch my step. Play along with the farce . Brush my teeth. Comb my hair. At all costs, stifle my natural hide ous laughter. Actually, I was not the only le gitimate living desce ndant of the Laughing Man. There we re twenty-five Comanches in the Club, or twenty-five legitimate living descendants of the Laughing Man--all of us circulating ominously, and incognito, throughout the city, siz ing up elevator operators as potential archenemie s, whispe ring side -of-the-mouth but fluent orders into the ears of cocker spanie ls, drawing beads, with index finge rs, on the foreheads of arithme tic teache rs. And always waiting, waiting for a decent chance to strike te rror and admiration in the nearest mediocre heart. One afternoon in February, just after Comanche baseball season had opene d, I obse rved a new fixture in the Chief's bus. Above the rear-view mirror ove r the windshield, the re was a small, framed photograph of a girl dressed in academic cap and gown. It seemed to me that a girl's picture clashed with the general men-only decor of the bus, and I bluntly asked the Chie f who she was. He hedged at first, but finally admitte d that she was a girl. I asked him what her name was. He answe red unforthrightly, "Mary Hudson." I asked him if she was in the movies or something. He said no, that she used to go to We llesley College. He adde d, on some slow-proce ssed afterthought, that Wellesley College was a ve ry high class college. I asked him what he had her picture in the bus for, though. He shrugged slightly, as much as to imply, it seeme d to me , that the picture had more or less been planted on him. During the next couple of weeks, the picture --however forcibly or accidentally it had been planted on the Chief--was not removed from the bus. It didn't go out with the Baby Ruth wrappers and the fallen licorice whips. However, we Comanches got used to it. It gradually took on the unarresting personality of a speedometer. But one day as we were on our way to the Park, the Chief pulled the bus over to a curb on Fifth Avenue in the Sixtie s, a good half mile past our baseball field. Some twenty back-seat drive rs at once demanded an explanation, but the Chief gave none. Instead, he simply got into his story-telling position and swung premature ly into a fre sh installment of "The Laughing Man." He had scarcely begun, however, when someone tapped on the bus door. The Chie f's reflexes were geared high that day. He lite rally flung himse lf around in his seat, yanked the ope rating handle of the door, and a girl in a be aver coat climbed into the bus. Offhand, I can remembe r seeing just three girls in my life who struck me as having unclassifiably great beauty at first sight. One was a thin girl in a black bathing suit who was having a lot of trouble putting up an orange umbre lla at Jones Beach, circa 1936. The second was a girl aboard a Caribbean cruise ship in 1939, who thre w her cigarette lighter at a porpoise. And the third was the Chie f's girl, Mary Hudson. "Am I very late?" she asked the Chief, smiling at him. She might just as we ll have asked if she was ugly. "No!" the Chief said. A trifle wildly, he looked at the Comanches near his seat and signalle d the row to give way. Mary Hudson sat down between me and a boy named

[ 27 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Edgar some thing, whose uncle's best frie nd was a bootlegge r. We gave her all the room in the world. Then the bus started off with a peculiar, amateur-like lurch. The Comanches, to the last man, we re silent. On the way back to our regular parking place, Mary Hudson leaned forward in he r seat and gave the Chie f an enthusiastic account of the trains she had misse d and the train she hadn't misse d; she lived in Douglaston, Long Island. The Chief was ve ry ne rvous. He didn't just fail to contribute any talk of his own; he could hardly listen to he rs. The gearshift knob came off in his hand, I remembe r. Whe n we got out of the bus, Mary Hudson stuck right with us. I'm sure that by the time we reache d the baseball fie ld the re was on every Comanche's face a some-girlsjust-don't-know-when-to-go-home look. And to really top things off, whe n another Comanche and I were flipping a coin to decide which team would take the field first, Mary Hudson wistfully expresse d a desire to join the game. The response to this couldn't have been more cle an-cut. Where be fore we Comanches had simply stare d at he r femaleness, we now glared at it. She smiled back at us. It was a shade disconcerting. Then the Chief took over, revealing what had formerly been a wellconcealed flair for incompetence . He took Mary Hudson aside , just out of earshot of the Comanches, and seemed to addre ss he r solemnly, rationally. At length, Mary Hudson interrupte d him, and her voice was perfectly audible to the Comanches. "But I do," she said. "I do, too, want to play!" The Chief nodde d and trie d again. He pointed in the direction of the infield, which was soggy and pitted. He picked up a regulation bat and de monstrated its weight. "I don't care ," Mary Hudson said distinctly, "I came all the way to New York--to the dentist and eve rything--and I'm gonna play." The Chie f nodde d again but gave up. He walked cautiously ove r to home plate , whe re the Braves and the Warriors, the two Comanche teams, we re waiting, and looked at me. I was captain of the Warriors. He mentione d the name of my re gular cente r fie lder, who was home sick, and suggested that Mary Hudson take his place. I said I didn't need a ce nter fie lder. The Chie f asked me what the he ll did I mean I didn't need a cente r fie lder. I was shocked. It was the first time I had heard the Chief swear. What's more , I could feel Mary Hudson smiling at me . For poise, I picked up a stone and thre w it at a tree. We took the fie ld first. No business went out to center field the first inning. From my position on first base , I glanced behind me now and then. Each time I did, Mary Hudson waved gaily to me . She was wearing a catcher's mitt, her own adamant choice. It was a horrible sight. Mary Hudson batted ninth on the Warriors' lineup. When I informed her of this arrangement, she made a little face and said, "Well, hurry up, then." And as a matter of fact we did seem to hurry up. She got to bat in the first inning. She took off her beaver coat--and her catche r's mitt--for the occasion and advanced to the plate in a darkbrown dress. When I gave her a bat, she asked me why it was so heavy. The Chief left his umpire's position behind the pitche r and came forward anxiously. He told Mary Hudson to rest the end of her bat on her right shoude r. "I am," she said. He told he r not to choke the bat too tightly. "I'm not," she said. He told he r to keep her eye right on the ball. "I will," she said. "Get outa the way." She swung mightily at the first ball pitched to he r and hit it ove r the le ft fielde r's head. It was good for an ordinary double, but Mary Hudson got to third on it--standing up. Whe n my astonishment had worn off, and then my awe , and then my de light, I looked over at the Chief. He didn't so much seem to be standing behind the pitcher as floating over him. He was a completely happy man. Over on third base, Mary Hudson waved to me. I waved back. I couldn't have stopped myself, even if I'd wanted to. He r stickwork aside, she happene d to be a girl who knew how to wave to somebody from third base. The re st of the game , she got on base e ve ry time she came to bat. For some reason, she seemed to hate first base; the re was no holding her there . At least three times, she stole second. Her fielding couldn't have been worse , but we were piling up too many runs to take se rious notice of it. I think it would have improved if she'd gone after flie s with almost anything except a catcher's mitt. She wouldn't take it off, though. She said it was cute.

[ 28 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger The next month or so, she played baseball with the Comanches a couple of times a week (whenever she had an appointment with her dentist, apparently). Some afternoons she met the bus on time , some afternoons she was late. Sometimes she talked a blue streak in the bus, sometime s she just sat and smoked her He rbe rt Tareyton cigarettes (cork-tipped). When you sat next to her in the bus, she sme lled of a wonde rful perfume . One wintry day in April, afte r making his usual three o'clock pickup at 109th and Amste rdam, the Chie f turne d the loade d bus east at 110th Street and cruised routinely down Fifth Avenue . But his hair was combed we t, he had on his overcoat instead of his leathe r windbreake r, and I reasonably surmised that Mary Hudson was scheduled to join us. When we z ipped past our usual e ntrance to the Park, I was sure of it. The Chie f parked the bus on the come r in the Sixties appropriate to the occasion. Then, to kill time painlessly for the Comanches, he straddled his seat backward and re leased a new installment of "The Laughing Man." I re membe r the installment to the last detail, and I must outline it brie fly. A flux of circumstances de live re d the Laughing Man's best friend, his timber wolf, Black Wing, into a physical and intellectual trap set by the Dufarges. The Dufarges, aware of the Laughing Man's high sense of loyalty, offered him Black Wing's freedom in exchange for his own. In the best faith in the world, the Laughing Man agreed to these terms. (Some of the minor mechanics of his ge nius we re often subject to mysterious little breakdowns.) It was arranged for the Laughing Man to meet the Dufarges at midnight in a designated section of the dense forest surrounding Paris, and the re , by moonlight, Black Wing would be set free. However, the Dufarges had no inte ntion of liberating Black Wing, whom they feare d and loathe d. On the night of the transaction, they leashe d a stand-in timbe r wolf for Black Wing, first dyeing its le ft hind foot snow white, to look like Black Wing's. But the re were two things the Dufarges hadn't counted on: the Laughing Man's se ntimentality and his command of the timber-wolf language. As soon as he had allowed Dufarge's daughte r to tie him with barbed wire to a tree, the Laughing Man felt calle d upon to raise his beautiful, me lodious voice in a few words of fare well to his supposed old frie nd. The stand-in, a few moonlit yards away, was impressed by the stranger's command of the language and listened politely for a mome nt to the lastminute advice, personal and professional, that the Laughing Man was giving out. At length, though, the stand-in grew impatient and began shifting his weight from paw to paw. Abruptly, and rather unpleasantly, he interrupted the Laughing Man with the information that, in the first place , his name wasn't Dark Wing or Black Wing or Gray Legs or any of that business, it was Armand, and, in the second place, he'd ne ver been to China in his life and hadn't the slightest intention of going the re . Prope rly infuriated, the Laughing Man pushed off his mask with his tongue and confronted the Dufarges with his naked face by moonlight. Mlle . Dufarge responded by passing out cold. Her father was luckie r. By chance, he was having one of his coughing spells at the mome nt and thereby missed the lethal unveiling. Whe n his coughing spell was ove r and he saw his daughter stretched out supine on the moonlit ground, Dufarge put two and two togethe r. Shielding his e yes with his hand, he fired the full clip in his automatic toward the sound of the Laughing Man's heavy, sibilant breathing. The installment ended the re . The Chief took his dollar Ingersoll out of his watch pocket, looked at it, then swung around in his seat and started up the motor. I checke d my own watch. It was almost four-thirty. As the bus move d forward, I aske d the Chief if he wasn't going to wait for Mary Hudson. He didn't answer me , and before I could re peat my question, he tilted back his head and addre sse d all of us: "Let's have a little quiet in this damn bus." Whate ver else it may have been, the orde r was basically unsensible. The bus had been, and was, ve ry quie t. Almost eve rybody was thinking about the spot the Laughing Man had been le ft in. We were long past worrying about him--we had too much confidence in him for that--but we were never past accepting his most perilous moments quie tly. In the third or fourth inning of our ball game that afte rnoon, I spotted Mary Hudson from first base. She was sitting on a bench about a hundred yards to my left, sandwiched between two nursemaids with baby carriages. She had on her beaver coat,

[ 29 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger she was smoking a cigarette , and she seemed to be looking in the direction of our game . I got excited about my discove ry and ye lled the information ove r to the Chief, behind the pitche r. He hurried over to me , not quite running. "Whe re ?" he asked me. I pointed again. He stare d for a moment in the right dire ction, then said he'd be back in a minute and le ft the field. He le ft it slowly, opening his overcoat and putting his hands in the hip pockets of his trouse rs. I sat down on first base and watche d. By the time the Chief reached Mary Hudson, his overcoat was buttoned again and his hands we re down at his sides. He stood over he r for about five minutes, apparently talking to her. Then Mary Hudson stood up, and the two of them walked toward the base ball field. They didn't talk as the y walked, or look at each other. When they reache d the field, the Chie f took his position behind the pitche r. I ye lled ove r to him. "Isn't she gonna play?" He told me to cove r my sack. I cove red my sack and watched Mary Hudson. She walked slowly behind the plate, with he r hands in the pockets of her beaver coat, and finally sat down on a misplaced players' bench just beyond third base . She lit another cigarette and crossed he r legs. Whe n the Warriors we re at bat, I went over to he r bench and asked he r if she fe lt like playing le ft field. She shook her head. I asked he r if she had a cold. She shook he r head again. I told he r I didn't have anybody in le ft field. I told her I had a guy playing cente r fie ld and left fie ld. There was no response at all to this information. I tosse d my firstbaseman's mitt up in the air and tried to have it land on my head, but it fell in a mud puddle. I wiped it off on my trousers and asked Mary Hudson if she wanted to come up to my house for dinner sometime. I told he r the Chief came up a lot. "Leave me alone," she said. "Just please leave me alone." I stared at he r, the n walked off in the direction of the Warriors' bench, taking a tange rine out of my pocket and tossing it up in the air. About midway along the third-base foul line, I turne d around and started to walk backwards, looking at Mary Hudson and holding on to my tangerine. I had no ide a what was going on between the Chief and Mary Hudson (and still haven't, in any but a fairly low, intuitive sense ), but nonetheless, I couldn't have been more ce rtain that Mary Hudson had pe rmanently dropped out of the Comanche lineup. It was the kind of whole ce rtainty, howeve r independent of the sum of its facts, that can make walking backwards more than normally haz ardous, and I bumped smack into a baby carriage . Afte r another inning, the light got bad for fielding. The game was called, and we started picking up all the equipment. The last good look I had at Mary Hudson, she was over near third base crying. The Chie f had hold of the slee ve of her beaver coat, but she got away from him. She ran off the fie ld onto the cement path and ke pt running till I couldn't see he r any more. The Chief didn't go after her. He just stood watching her disappear. Then he turned around and walked down to home plate and picked up our two bats; we always le ft the bats for him to carry. I went ove r to him and asked if he and Mary Hudson had had a fight. He told me to tuck my shirt in. Just as always, we Comanches ran the last few hundred feet to the place whe re the bus was parked, ye lling, shoving, trying out strangleholds on each other, but all of us alive to the fact that it was again time for "The Laughing Man." Racing across Fifth Avenue, somebody dropped his extra or discarde d sweate r, and I tripped over it and we nt sprawling. I finishe d the charge to the bus; but the be st seats we re taken by that time and I had to sit down in the middle of the bus. Annoye d at the arrangement, I gave the boy sitting on my right a poke in the ribs with my elbow, then faced around and watched the Chie f cross ove r Fifth. It was not ye t dark out, but a five -fifteen dimness had set in. The Chief crossed the street with his coat collar up, the bats under his left arm, and his concentration on the street. His black hair, which had been combed wet earlier in the day, was dry now and blowing. I remembe r wishing the Chief had gloves. The bus, as usual, was quie t when he climbed in--as proportionate ly quiet, at any rate , as a theatre with dimming house lights. Conve rsations we re finishe d in a hurrie d whisper or shut off comple te ly. Nonetheless, the first thing the Chief said to us was "All right, le t's cut out the noise, or no story." In an instant, an unconditional silence filled the bus, cutting off from the Chie f any alte rnative but to take up his narrating position.

[ 30 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Whe n he had done so, he took out a handkerchief and methodically blew his nose, one nostril at a time. We watche d him with patience and e ven a certain amount of spectator's inte re st. Whe n he had finishe d with his handkerchief, he folded it neatly in quarters and replaced it in his pocket. He then gave us the new installment of "The Laughing Man." From start to finish, it lasted no longer than five minutes. Four of Dufarge's bullets struck the Laughing Man, two of them through the heart. Whe n Dufarge, who was still shielding his eyes against the sight of the Laughing Man's face , heard a queer exhalation of agony from the direction of the target, he was overjoye d. His black heart beating wildly, he rushed ove r to his unconscious daughte r and brought he r to. The pair of them, beside themse lves with delight and coward's courage , now dared to look up at the Laughing Man. His head was bowed as in death, his chin resting on his bloody chest. Slowly, gree dily, father and daughter came forward to inspect the ir spoils. Quite a surprise was in store for them. The Laughing Man, far from dead, was busy contracting his stomach muscles in a secret manner. As the Dufarges came into range, he suddenly raise d his face , gave a terrible laugh, and neatly, even fastidiously, regurgitated all four bullets. The impact of this feat on the Dufarges was so acute that their hearts literally burst, and they dropped dead at the Laughing Man's feet. (If the installment was going to be a short one anyway, it could have ende d the re ; the Comanches could have manage d to rationalize the sudden death of the Dufarges. But it didn't end there .) Day after day, the Laughing Man continue d to stand lashe d to the tree with barbed wire , the Dufarges decomposing at his feet. Bleeding profusely and cut off from his supply of eagle s' blood, he had never been close r to death. One day, howe ve r, in a hoarse but eloquent voice, he appeale d for help to the animals of the fore st. He summoned them to fetch Omba, the lovable dwarf. And they did. But it was a long trip back and forth across the Paris-Chinese borde r, and by the time Omba arrive d on the scene with a medical kit and a fresh supply of eagles' blood, the Laughing Man was in a coma. Omba's ve ry first act of me rcy was to retrieve his maste r's mask, which had blown up against Mlle. Dufarge's vermin-infested torso. He placed it respectfully ove r the hideous features, then proceeded to dress the wounds. Whe n the Laughing Man's small eyes finally opene d, Omba eagerly raised the vial of eagles' blood up to the mask. But the Laughing Man didn't drink from it. Instead, he weakly pronounced his be love d Black Wing's name. Omba bowed his own slightly distorte d head and reveale d to his master that the Dufarges had kille d Black Wing. A pe culiar and heart-rending gasp of final sorrow came from the Laughing Man. He reached out wanly for the vial of eagles' blood and crushed it in his hand. What little blood he had le ft trickled thinly down his wrist. He orde re d Omba to look away, and, sobbing, Omba obeyed him. The Laughing Man's last act, before turning his face to the bloodstaine d ground, was to pull off his mask. The story ended there, of course. (Neve r to be revive d.) The Chief started up the bus. Across the aisle from me , Billy Walsh, who was the youngest of all the Comanches, burst into tears. None of us told him to shut up. As for me, I remembe r my knees were shaking. A few minutes late r, when I stepped out of the Chief's bus, the first thing I chanced to see was a pie ce of red tissue pape r flapping in the wind against the base of a lamppost. It looked like someone's poppy-pe tal mask. I arrived home with my teeth chattering uncontrollably and was told to go right straight to bed.

[ 31 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

Down at the Dinghy
IT was a little after four o'clock on an Indian Summer afte rnoon. Some fifteen or twenty time s since noon, Sandra, the maid, had come away from the lake-front window in the kitchen with he r mouth se t tight. This time as she came away, she absently untie d and re-tied he r apron strings, taking up what little slack her e normous waistline allowed. Then she went back to the e name l table and lowered he r freshly uniformed body into the seat opposite Mrs. Sne ll. Mrs. Snell having finishe d the cleaning and ironing was having he r customary cup of tea be fore walking down the road to the bus stop. Mrs. Snell had her hat on. It was the same interesting, black fe lt headpiece she had worn, not just all summe r, but for the past three summe rs--through record heat waves, through change of life, ove r scores of ironing boards, over the helms of dozens of vacuum cle ane rs. The Hattie Carnegie labe l was still inside it, faded but (it might be said) unbowe d. "I'm not gonna worry about it," Sandra announced, for the fifth or sixth time, addressing herse lf as much as Mrs. Snell. "I made up my mind I'm not gonna worry about it. What for?" "That's right," said Mrs. Sne ll. "I wouldn't. I really wouldn't. Reach me my bag, dear." A leathe r handbag, e xtremely worn, but with a label inside it as impressive as the one inside Mrs. Sne ll's hat, lay on the pantry. Sandra was able to reach it without standing up. She handed it across the table to Mrs. Sne ll, who opened it and took out a pack of mentholated cigare ttes and a folder of Stork Club matche s. Mrs. Snell lit a cigarette, then brought her teacup to her lips, but immediate ly set it down in its saucer. "If this don't hurry up and cool off, I'm gonna miss my bus." She looked over at Sandra, who was staring, oppre ssedly, in the gene ral dire ction of the coppe r sauce -pans lined against the wall. "Stop worryin' about it," Mrs. Snell ordered. "What good's it gonna do to worry about it? Either he te lls he r or he don't. That's all. What good's worryin' gonna do?" "I'm not worryin' about it," Sandra responded. "The last thing I'm gonna do is worry about it. Only, it drives ya loony, the way that kid goes pussyfootin' all around the house . Ya can't hear him, ya know. I mean nobody can hear him, ya know. Just the othe r day I was shellin' beans--right at this here table --and I almost stepped on his hand. He was sittin' right under the table ." "We ll. I wouldn't worry about it." "I mean ya gotta weigh eve ry word ya say around him," Sandra said. "It drives ya loony." "I still can't drink this," Mrs. Snell said. ". . . That's terrible. When ya gotta we igh every word ya say and all." "It drive s ya loony! I mean it. Half the time I'm half loony." Sandra brushed some imaginary crumbs off he r lap, and snorted. "A four-year-old kid!" "He's kind of a good-lookin' kid," said Mrs. Sne ll. "The m big brown eyes and all." Sandra snorted again. "He 's gonna have a nose just like the father." She raised her cup and drank from it without any difficulty. "I don't know what they wanna stay up he re all Octobe r for," she said malconte nte dly, lowering her cup. "I mean none of 'em even go anywheres near the water now. She don't go in, he don't go in, the kid don't go in. Nobody goes in now. They don't even take that crazy boat out no more. I don't know what they threw good money away on it for." "I don't know how you can drink yours. I can't eve n drink mine ." Sandra stared rancorously at the opposite wall. "I'll be so gladda get backa the city. I'm not foolin'. I hate this craz y place." She gave Mrs. Sne ll a hostile glance. "It's all right for you, you live he re all year round. You got your social life here and all. You don't care ." "I'm gonna drink this if it kills me ," Mrs. Sne ll said, looking at the clock over the electric stove. "What would you do if you were in my shoes?" Sandra asked abruptly. "I mean what would you do? Te lla truth."

[ 32 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger This was the sort of question Mrs. Snell slippe d into as if it were an ermine coat. She at once le t go her teacup. "We ll, in the first place ," she said, "I wouldn't worry about it. What I'd do, I'd look around for another--" "I'm not worried about it," Sandra interrupted. "I know that, but what I'd do, I'd just get me--" The swinging door opened from the dining room and Boo Boo Tannenbaum, the lady of the house, came into the kitchen. She was a small, almost hipless girl of twenty-five, with style le ss, colorless, brittle hair pushed back be hind he r ears, which we re very large. She was dressed in knee-length jeans, a black turtleneck pullover, and socks and loafers. Her joke of a name aside, her general unpre ttiness aside, she was-in terms of pe rmanently memorable , immode rate ly perceptive, small-area faces-a stunning and final girl. She went directly to the re frigerator and ope ned it. As she peered inside , with he r legs apart and her hands on he r knees, she whistled, unme lodically, through her teeth, keeping time with a little uninhibited, pendulum action of her rear end. Sandra and Mrs. Sne ll were silent. Mrs. Snell put out he r cigare tte, unhurrie dly. "Sandra . . ." "Yes, ma'am?" Sandra looked alertly past Mrs. Snell's hat. "Are n't there any more pickles? I want to bring him a pickle ." "He et 'em," Sandra reported intelligently. "He et 'em before he went to bed last night. There was only two left." "Oh. We ll, I'll get some when I go to the station. I thought maybe I could lure him out of that boat." Boo Boo shut the re frigerator door and walked over to look out of the lakefront window. "Do we need anything else?" she aske d, from the window. "Just bread." "I left your check on the hall table , Mrs. Snell. Thank you." "O.K.," said Mrs. Sne ll. "I hear L ionel's supposeta be runnin' away." She gave a short laugh. "Certainly looks that way," Boo Boo said, and slid her hands into her hip pocke ts. "At least he don't run ve ry far away," Mrs. Sne ll said, giving anothe r short laugh. At the window, Boo Boo change d her position slightly, so that he r back wasn't directly to the two women at the table . "No," she said, and pushed back some hair behind her ear. She added, pure ly informatively: "He 's been hitting the road re gularly since he was two. But neve r ve ry hard. I think the farthest he eve r got--in the city, at least--was to the Mall in Central Park. J ust a couple of blocks from home. The least far--or neare st-he e ve r got was to the front door of our building. He stuck around to say goodbye to his father." Both women at the table laughe d. "The Mall's where they all go skatin' in New York," Sandra said very sociably to Mrs. Snell. "The kids and all." "Oh!" said Mrs. Snell. "He was only three . It was just last year," Boo Boo said, taking out a pack of cigarettes and a folder of matches from a side pocket in he r jeans. She lit a cigarette, while the two women spiritedly watched her. "Big excitement. We had the whole police force out looking for him." "They find him?" said Mrs. Snell. "Sure they found him!" said Sandra with contempt. "Wuddaya think?" "They found him at a quarte r past e le ven of night, in the middle of--my God, Fe bruary, I think. Not a child in the park. Just mugge rs, I guess, and an assortment of roaming degenerates. He was sitting on the floor of the bandstand, rolling a marble back and forth along a crack. Half-frozen to death and looking--" "Holy Mackerel!" said Mrs. Snell. "How come he did it? I mean what was he runnin' away about?" Boo Boo blew a single, faulty smoke-ring at a pane of glass. "Some child in the park that afternoon had come up to him with the dreamy misinformation, `You stink, kid.' At least, that's why we think he did it. I don't know, Mrs. Snell. It's all slightly over my head." "How long's he been doin' it?" asked Mrs. Snell. "I mean how long's he been doin' it?"

[ 33 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "We ll, at the age of two-and-a-half," Boo Boo said biographically, "he sought refuge under a sink in the basement of our apartment house . Down in the laundry. Naomi somebody--a close frie nd of his--told him she had a worm in he r thermos bottle . At least, that's all we could get out of him." Boo Boo sighed, and came away from the window with a long ash on he r cigare tte. She started for the screen door. "I'll have another go at it," she said, by way of goodby to both women. They laughed. "Mildred," Sandra, still laughing, addressed Mrs. Snell, "you're gonna miss your bus if ya don't get a move on." Boo Boo closed the screen door behind her. She stood on the slight downgrade of her front lawn, with the low, glaring, late afternoon sun at her back. About two hundred yards ahead of he r, her son Lionel was sitting in the stem seat of his father's dinghy. Tied, and strippe d of its main and jib sails, the dinghy floate d at a perfect right angle away from the far e nd of the pie r. Fifty feet or so beyond it, a lost or abandoned water ski floate d bottom up, but there were no pleasure boats to be seen on the lake ; just a stern-e nd view of the county launch on its way ove r to Leech's Landing. Boo Boo found it queerly difficult to kee p Lione l in steady focus. The sun, though not especially hot, was none theless so brilliant that it made any fairly distant image--a boy, a boat--seem almost as wavering and refractional as a stick in water. Afte r a couple of minutes, Boo Boo le t the image go. She peeled down he r cigare tte Army style, and then started toward the pier. It was Octobe r, and the pier boards no longe r could hit her in the face with re flected heat. She walked along whistling "Kentucky Babe" through her teeth. When she reache d the end of the pie r, she squatted, her knees audible, at the right edge, and looked down at Lione l. He was less than an oar's length away from her. He didn't look up. "Ahoy," Boo Boo said. "Friend. Pirate. Dirty dog. I'm back." Still not looking up, Lionel abruptly seemed called upon to demonstrate his sailing ability. He swung the dead tiller all the way to the right, then imme diate ly yanked it back in to his side. He kept his eyes exclusively on the deck of the boat. "It is I," Boo Boo said. "V ice-Admiral Tannenbaum. Nee Glass. Come to inspect the stermaphors." There was a response. "You aren't an admiral. You're a lady," Lionel said. His sentences usually had at least one break of faulty breath control, so that, ofte n, his emphasized words, instead of rising, sank. Boo Boo not only listened to his voice , she seemed to watch it. "Who told you that? Who told you I wasn't an admiral?" Lionel answe red, but inaudibly. "Who?" said Boo Boo. "Daddy." Still in a squatting position, Boo Boo put her left hand through the V of her legs, touching the pier boards in order to keep her balance. "Your daddy's a nice fella," she said, "but he's probably the biggest landlubber I know. It's pe rfectly true that when I'm in port I'm a lady--that's true. But my true calling is first, last, and always the bounding--" "You aren't an admiral," Lione l said. "I beg your pardon?" "You aren't an admiral. You're a lady all the time." There was a short silence. L ionel filled it by changing the course of his craft again--his hold on the tiller was a two-armed one. He was wearing khaki-colore d shorts and a clean, white T-shirt with a dye picture, across the che st, of Je rome the Ostrich playing the violin. He was quite tanned, and his hair, which was almost exactly like his mothe r's in color and quality, was a little sun-bleache d on top. "Many people think I'm not an admiral," Boo Boo said, watching him. "Just because I don't shoot my mouth off about it." Kee ping he r balance , she took a cigare tte and matches out of the side pocket of her je ans. "I'm almost never tempted to discuss my rank with people . Especially with little boys who don't eve n look at me when I talk to them. I'd be drummed out of the bloomin' se rvice." Without lighting he r cigare tte, she

[ 34 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger suddenly got to her fee t, stood unreasonably e re ct, made an oval out of the thumb and inde x finger of he r right hand, drew the oval to her mouth, and--kazoo style--sounded something like a bugle call. Lione l instantly looked up. In all probability, he was aware that the call was bogus, but nonetheless he seemed dee ply aroused; his mouth fe ll open. Boo Boo sounde d the call--a peculiar amalgamation of "Taps" and "Reve ille"-three times, without any pauses. Then, ceremoniously, she saluted the opposite shoreline. When she finally reassumed her squat on the pie r edge, she seemed to do so with maximum regre t, as if she had just been profoundly move d by one of the virtues of naval tradition closed to the public and small boys. She gazed out at the petty horizon of the lake for a moment, then seemed to remember that she was not absolute ly alone. She glanced-vene rably--down at L ionel, whose mouth was still open. "That was a secret bugle call that only admirals are allowe d to hear." She lit her cigarette, and blew out the match with a theatrically thin, long stream of smoke . "If anybody knew I let you hear that call--" She shook he r head. She again fixe d the sextant of he r eye on the horizon. "Do it again." "Impossible ." "Why?" Boo Boo shrugge d. "Too many low-grade office rs around, for one thing." She changed he r position, taking up a cross-legged, Indian squat. She pulled up her socks. "I'll tell you what I'll do, though," she said, matte r-of-factly. "If you'll tell me why you're running away, I'll blow every secret bugle call for you I know. All right?" Lionel immediate ly looked down at the deck again. "No," he said. "Why not?" "Because." "Because why?" "Because I don't want to," said Lionel, and je rked the tille r for emphasis. Boo Boo shie lded the right side of her face from the glare of the sun. "You told me you we re all through running away," she said. "We talke d about it, and you told me you we re all through. You promise d me." Lionel gave a reply, but it didn't carry. "What?" said Boo Boo. "I didn't promise." "Ah, yes, you did. You most certainly did." Lionel resumed steering his boat. "If you're an admiral," he said, "where's your fleet?" "My flee t. I'm glad you asked me that," Boo Boo said, and started to lowe r herse lf into the dinghy. "Get off!" Lione l orde red, but without giving over to shrillness, and kee ping his e yes down. "Nobody can come in." "They can't?" Boo Boo's foot was already touching the bow of the boat. She obediently drew it back up to pier level. "Nobody at all?" She got back into her Indian squat. "Why not?" Lionel's answer was complete, but, again, not loud e nough. "What?" said Boo Boo. "Because the y're not allowed." Boo Boo, kee ping he r eyes steadily on the boy, said nothing for a full minute. "I'm sorry to hear it," she said, finally. "I'd just love to come down in your boat. I'm so lone some for you. I miss you so much. I've been all alone in the house all day without anybody to talk to." Lionel didn't swing the tiller. He examined the grain of wood in its handle. "You can talk to Sandra," he said. "Sandra's busy," Boo Boo said. "Anyway, I don't want to talk to Sandra, I want to talk to you. I wanna come down in your boat and talk to you." "You can talk from the re ." "What?" "You can talk from the re ." "No, I can't. It's too big a distance . I have to get up close ." Lionel swung the tiller. "Nobody can come in," he said. "What?"

[ 35 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "Nobody can come in." "We ll, will you tell me from there why you're running away?" Boo Boo asked. "Afte r you promised me you we re all through?" A pair of underwater goggles lay on the deck of the dinghy, near the stem seat. For answe r, L ionel secured the headstrap of the goggles between the big and second toes of his right foot, and, with a de ft, brief, leg action, flipped the goggles ove rboard. They sank at once. "That's nice . That's constructive ," said Boo Boo. "Those belong to your Uncle Webb. Oh, he'll be so de lighted." She dragged on he r cigare tte. "They once belonged to your Uncle Seymour." "I don't care." "I see that. I see you don't," Boo Boo said. Her cigarette was angled peculiarly between he r fingers; it burned dange rously close to one of he r knuckle grooves. Suddenly feeling the heat, she le t the cigare tte drop to the surface of the lake. The n she took out something from one of her side pockets. It was a package, about the size of a deck of cards, wrapped in white paper and tied with green ribbon. "This is a key chain," she said, fee ling the boy's eyes look up at her. "Just like Daddy's. But with a lot more keys on it than Daddy's has. This one has ten keys." Lionel leaned forward in his seat, le tting go the tiller. He he ld out his hands in catching position. "Throw it?" he said. "Please?" "Let's keep our seats a minute , Sunshine . I have a little thinking to do. I should throw this key chain in the lake." Lionel stare d up at her with his mouth ope n. He close d his mouth. "It's mine," he said on a diminishing note of justice . Boo Boo, looking down at him, shrugge d. "I don't care ." Lionel slowly sat back in his seat, watching his mothe r, and reached behind him for the tiller. His eye s re fle cted pure pe rception, as his mothe r had known they would. "Here." Boo Boo tossed the package down to him. It lande d squarely on his lap. He looked at it in his lap, picked it off, looked at it in his hand, and flicked it-sidearm--into the lake. He then imme diately looked up at Boo Boo, his eyes fille d not with defiance but tears. In anothe r instant, his mouth was distorte d into a horizontal figure -8, and he was crying mightily. Boo Boo got to her feet, gingerly, like someone whose foot has gone to slee p in theatre, and lowered he rself into the dinghy. In a moment, she was in the ste rn seat, with the pilot on her lap, and she was rocking him and kissing the back of his neck and giving out ce rtain information: "Sailors don't cry, baby. Sailors neve r cry. Only when the ir ships go down. Or whe n they're shipwrecked, on rafts and all, with nothing to drink except--" "Sandra--told Mrs. Smell--that Daddy's a big--sloppy--kike." Just pe rceptibly, Boo Boo flinched, but she lifted the boy off he r lap and stood him in front of her and pushed back his hair from his forehead. "She did, huh?" she said. Lionel worked his head up and down, emphatically. He came in closer, still crying, to stand between his mother's le gs. "We ll, that isn't too terrible," Boo Boo said, holding him between the two vises of he r arms and legs. "That isn't the worst that could happen." She gently bit the rim of the boy's ear. "Do you know what a kike is, baby?" Lionel was either unwilling or unable to speak up at once . At any rate, he waite d till the hiccupping afte rmath of his tears had subsided a little. The n his answer was de livere d, muffled but inte lligible, into the warmth of Boo Boo's neck. "It's one of those things that go up in the air," he said. "With string you hold." The bette r to look at him, Boo Boo pushed her son slightly away from he r. Then she put a wild hand inside the seat of his trousers, startling the boy conside rably, but almost immediately withdrew it and decorously tucked in his shirt for him. "Tell you what we 'll do," she said. "We 'll drive to town and get some pickles, and some bread, and we 'll eat the pickles in the car, and then we'll go to the station and get Daddy, and then we 'll bring Daddy home and make him take us for a ride in the boat. You'll have to help him carry the sails down. O.K.?"

[ 36 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "O.K.," said L ionel. They didn't walk back to the house ; they raced. Lione l won.

[ 37 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

For Esme:--with Love and Squalor
JUST RECENTLY, by air mail, I re ceived an invitation to a wedding that will take place in England on April 18th. It happens to be a wedding I'd give a lot to be able to ge t to, and when the invitation first arrived, I thought it might just be possible for me to make the trip abroad, by plane , expenses be hange d. However, I've since discussed the matte r rather extensively with my wife, a bre athtakingly levelheaded girl, and we've decided against it--for one thing, I'd completely forgotten that my mother-in-law is looking forward to spending the last two weeks in April with us. I really don't get to see Mother Grencher te rribly often, and she 's not getting any younger. She 's fifty-eight. (As she 'd be the first to admit.) All the same, though, whe reve r I happen to be I don't think I'm the type that doesn't even lift a finge r to pre vent a we dding from flatting. Accordingly, I've gone ahead and jotte d down a few revealing notes on the bride as I knew he r almost six years ago. If my notes should cause the groom, whom I haven't met, an uneasy moment or two, so much the be tter. Nobody's aiming to please, here . More, really, to edify, to instruct. In April of 1944, I was among some sixty American enlisted men who took a rathe r specialize d pre-Invasion training course, directed by British Intelligence, in Devon, England. And as I look back, it seems to me that we were fairly unique , the sixty of us, in that there wasn't one good mixer in the bunch. We were all e ssentially lette r-writing types, and when we spoke to each othe r out of the line of duty, it was usually to ask somebody if he had any ink he wasn't using. When we we ren't writing le tters or attending classes, each of us we nt pretty much his own way. Mine usually led me, on clear days, in scenic circle s around the countryside. Rainy days, I generally sat in a dry place and read a book, often just an axe length away from a ping-pong table . The training course lasted three weeks, ending on a Saturday, a ve ry rainy one. At se ven that last night, our whole group was schedule d to entrain for London, where, as rumor had it, we were to be assigned to infantry and airborne divisions muste re d for the D Day landings. By three in the afternoon, I'd packe d all my be longings into my barrack bag, including a canvas gas-mask container full of books I'd brought over from the Other Side. (The gas mask itself I'd slipped through a porthole of the Mauretania some weeks e arlier, fully aware that if the enemy ever did use gas I'd never get the damn thing on in time .) I remember standing at an end window of our Quonset but for a ve ry long time, looking out at the slanting, dreary rain, my trigge r finger itching imperce ptibly, if at all. I could hear behind my back the uncomradely scratching of many fountain pens on many sheets of V-mail paper. Abruptly, with nothing special in mind, I came away from the window and put on my raincoat, cashmere muffler, galoshes, woollen gloves, and overseas cap (the last of which, I'm still told, I wore at an angle all my own--slightly down ove r both ears). The n, after synchronizing my wristwatch with the clock in the latrine , I walked down the long, wet cobblestone hill into town. I ignored the flashe s of lightning all around me . They either had your numbe r on them or they didn't. In the center of town, which was probably the wette st part of town, I stoppe d in front of a church to read the bulle tin board, mostly because the featured numerals, white on black, had caught my attention but partly because, afte r three years in the Army, I'd be come addicte d to reading bulletin boards. At three-fifteen, the board state d, the re would be children's-choir practice . I looked at my wristwatch, then back at the board. A sheet of pape r was tacked up, listing the names of the children expected to attend practice . I stood in the rain and read all the names, then ente red the church. A dozen or so adults were among the pews, several of them bearing pairs of small-siz e rubbe rs, soles up, in the ir laps. I passed along and sat down in the front row. On the rostrum, seated in three compact rows of auditorium chairs, were about twenty children, mostly girls, ranging in age from about seven to thirteen. At the moment, their choir coach, an e normous woman in tweeds, was advising them to open the ir mouths wide r when they sang. Had anyone, she asked, e ver heard of a little dickeybird that dare d to sing his charming song without first opening his little beak wide, wide, wide?

[ 38 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Apparently nobody e ve r had. She was given a steady, opaque look. She went on to say that she wanted all her children to absorb the meaning of the words they sang, not just mouth them, like silly-billy parrots. She then blew a note on he r pitch-pipe, and the children, like so many unde rage we ightlifte rs, raised their hymnbooks. They sang without instrume ntal accompanime nt--or, more accurately in the ir case, without any interfe re nce . Their voices we re me lodious and unsentimental, almost to the point whe re a somewhat more denominational man than myself might, without straining, have experie nced levitation. A couple of the very youngest children dragged the tempo a trifle , but in a way that only the compose r's mothe r could have found fault with. I had never heard the hymn, but I ke pt hoping it was one with a dozen or more ve rses. Listening, I scanned all the children's faces but watched one in particular, that of the child neare st me , on the end seat in the first row. She was about thirteen, with straight ash-blond hair of ear-lobe length, an exquisite forehead, and blase eyes that, I thought, might very possibly have counted the house. Her voice was distinctly separate from the othe r children's voice s, and not just because she was seated nearest me. It had the best uppe r register, the sweetest-sounding, the sure st, and it automatically le d the way. The young lady, however, seemed slightly bored with her own singing ability, or pe rhaps just with the time and place; twice , be tween ve rses, I saw her yawn. It was a ladylike yawn, a closed-mouth yawn, but you couldn't miss it; he r nostril wings gave he r away. The instant the hymn ended, the choir coach began to give her lengthy opinion of pe ople who can't keep their feet still and their lips seale d tight during the ministe r's se rmon. I gathe red that the singing part of the rehearsal was ove r, and before the coach's dissonant speaking voice could entirely break the spe ll the childre n's singing had cast, I got up and le ft the church. It was raining e ven harder. I walked down the street and looked through the window of the Red Cross re creation room, but soldiers were standing two and three deep at the coffee counte r, and, even through the glass, I could hear ping-pong balls bouncing in another room. I crossed the street and entered a civilian tearoom, which was empty except for a middle -aged waitress, who looke d as if she would have pre fe rred a customer with a dry raincoat. I used a coat tree as delicately as possible , and then sat down at a table and ordered tea and cinnamon toast. It was the first time all day that I'd spoken to anyone . I then looked through all my pockets, including my raincoat, and finally found a couple of stale le tters to reread, one from my wife, telling me how the se rvice at Schrafft's Eighty-eighth Stree t had fallen off, and one from my mother-in-law, asking me to please send he r some cashme re yarn first chance I got away from "camp." While I was still on my first cup of tea, the young lady I had been watching and liste ning to in the choir came into the tearoom. He r hair was soaking we t, and the rims of both ears we re showing. She was with a very small boy, unmistakably her brothe r, whose cap she remove d by lifting it off his head with two fingers, as if it were a laboratory specimen. Bringing up the rear was an efficient-looking woman in a limp felt hat--pre sumably the ir governess. The choir member, taking off her coat as she walked across the floor, made the table selection--a good one, from my point of view, as it was just eight or ten feet dire ctly in front of me. She and the governess sat down. The small boy, who was about five, wasn't ready to sit down ye t. He slid out of and discarde d his reefer; then, with the deadpan expression of a born he ller, he me thodically went about annoying his governess by pushing in and pulling out his chair several times, watching he r face . The governess, keeping he r voice down, gave him two or three orde rs to sit down and, in effe ct, stop the monkey business, but it was only when his siste r spoke to him that he came around and applied the small of his back to his chair se at. He immediately picked up his napkin and put it on his head. His siste r removed it, opened it, and spread it out on his lap. About the time the ir te a was brought, the choir member caught me staring over at he r party. She stared back at me, with those house-counting eyes of hers, then, abruptly, gave me a small, qualifie d smile . It was oddly radiant, as ce rtain small, qualified smiles sometime s are. I smile d back, much less radiantly, keeping my uppe r lip down over a coal-black G.I. temporary filling showing between two of my front tee th. The next thing I

[ 39 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger knew, the young lady was standing, with e nviable poise , be side my table . She was wearing a tartan dress--a Campbell tartan, I believe. It seemed to me to be a wonde rful dress for a ve ry young girl to be wearing on a rainy, rainy day. "I thought Ame ricans de spised tea," she said. It wasn't the observation of a smart ale ck but that of a truth-love r or a statistics-lover. I replied that some of us never drank anything but tea. I asked her if she'd care to join me. "Thank you," she said. "Pe rhaps for just a fraction of a moment." I got up and drew a chair for he r, the one opposite me , and she sat down on the forward quarter of it, keeping her spine easily and beautifully straight. I went back-almost hurried back--to my own chair, more than willing to hold up my end of a conversation. When I was seated, I couldn't think of anything to say, though. I smiled again, still keeping my coal-black filling under concealment. I remarke d that it was ce rtainly a terrible day out. "Yes; quite," said my guest, in the clear, unmistakable voice of a small-talk de tester. She place d her fingers flat on the table edge, like someone at a seance, then, almost instantly, closed her hands--her nails we re bitten down to the quick. She was wearing a wristwatch, a military-looking one that looked rathe r like a navigator's chronograph. Its face was much too large for her slender wrist. "You we re at choir practice," she said matte r-of-factly. "I saw you." I said I ce rtainly had been, and that I had heard her voice singing separately from the othe rs. I said I thought she had a very fine voice . She nodded. "I know. I'm going to be a professional singer." "Really? Opera?" "Heavens, no. I'm going to sing jazz on the radio and make heaps of money. Then, when I'm thirty, I shall retire and live on a ranch in Ohio." She touched the top of her soaking-wet head with the flat of he r hand. "Do you know Ohio?" she aske d. I said I'd been through it on the train a few times but that I didn't re ally know it. I offered he r a piece of cinnamon toast. "No, thank you," she said. "I eat like a bird, actually." I bit into a piece of toast myse lf, and commented that the re 's some mighty rough country around Ohio. "I know. An Ame rican I met told me . You're the eleventh Ame rican I've met." Her governess was now urgently signalling her to return to her own table--in effect, to stop bothering the man. My guest, however, calmly moved he r chair an inch or two so that her back broke all possible further communication with the home table . "You go to that secret Inte lligence school on the hill, don't you?" she inquire d coolly. As security-minded as the next one , I replied that I was visiting Devonshire for my health. "Really," she said, "I wasn't quite bom yesterday, you know." I said I'd be t she hadn't been, at that. I drank my tea for a moment. I was getting a trifle posture-conscious and I sat up somewhat straighter in my seat. "You seem quite inte lligent for an American," my guest mused. I told her that was a pre tty snobbish thing to say, if you thought about it at all, and that I hoped it was unworthy of her. She blushed-automatically conferring on me the social poise I'd been missing. "Well. Most of the Americans I've seen act like animals. They're foreve r punching one another about, and insulting eve ryone , and--You know what one of them did?" I shook my haad. "One of them threw an empty whiske y bottle through my aunt's window. Fortunate ly, the window was open. But does that sound very inte lligent to you?" It didn't e spe cially, but I didn't say so. I said that many soldiers, all over the world, we re a long way from home, and that few of them had had many real advantages in life . I said I'd thought that most people could figure that out for themse lves. "Possibly," said my guest, without conviction. She raised he r hand to he r wet head again, picked at a few limp filame nts of blond hair, trying to cove r he r exposed ear rims.

[ 40 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "My hair is soaking wet," she said. "I look a fright." She looked over at me. "I have quite wavy hair when it's dry." "I can see that, I can see you have." "Not actually curly, but quite wavy," she said. "Are you married?" I said I was. She nodded. "Are you ve ry deeply in love with your wife? Or am I being too pe rsonal?" I said that when she was, I'd speak up. She put her hands and wrists farther forward on the table, and I remember wanting to do something about that enormous-faced wristwatch she was wearing--perhaps suggest that she try wearing it around he r waist. "Usually, I'm not te rribly gregarious," she said, and looked over at me to see if I knew the meaning of the word. I didn't give her a sign, though, one way or the other. "I purely came over because I thought you looked extremely lonely. You have an extremely se nsitive face ." I said she was right, that I had been feeling lonely, and that I was ve ry glad she 'd come over. "I'm training myself to be more compassionate . My aunt says I'm a terribly cold pe rson," she said and felt the top of her head again. "I live with my aunt. She's an extreme ly kind person. Since the death of my mothe r, she 's done eve rything within her power to make Charles and me feel adjuste d." "I'm glad." "Mother was an e xtreme ly intelligent person. Quite sensuous, in many ways." She looked at me with a kind of fresh acuteness. "Do you find me te rribly cold?" I told her absolutely not--very much to the contrary, in fact. I told he r my name and asked for hers. She hesitated. "My first name is Esme. I don't think I shall tell you my full name , for the moment. I have a title and you may just be impresse d by titles. Ame ricans are, you know." I said I didn't think I would be, but that it might be a good idea, at that, to hold on to the title for a while . Just then, I felt someone's warm breath on the back of my ne ck. I turned around and just missed brushing nose s with Esme's small brother. Ignoring me, he addre ssed his siste r in a pie rcing treble: "Miss Megley said you must come and finish your tea!" His message de livered, he retired to the chair between his sister and me, on my right. I regarded him with high inte rest. He was looking very sple ndid in brown Shetland shorts, a navy-blue jersey, white shirt, and striped necktie. He gazed back at me with immense green e yes. "Why do people in films kiss sideways?" he demanded. "Sideways?" I said. It was a problem that had baffled me in my childhood. I said I guessed it was because actors' nose s are too big for kissing anyone head on. "His name is Charles," Esme said. "He's extremely brilliant for his age." "He ce rtainly has green eyes. Haven't you, Charles?" Charle s gave me the fishy look my question dese rved, then wriggled downward and forward in his chair till all of his body was unde r the table except his head, which he le ft, wrestler's-bridge style, on the chair seat. "They're orange ," he said in a strained voice, addressing the ceiling. He picked up a comer of the table cloth and put it over his handsome, deadpan little face . "Sometimes he's brilliant and sometimes he's not," Esme said. "Charle s, do sit up!" Charles staye d right where he was. He seemed to be holding his breath. "He misses our fathe r ve ry much. He was s-l-a-i-n in North Africa." I expressed regre t to hear it. Esme nodded. "Father adored him." She bit reflectively at the cuticle of he r thumb. "He looks very much like my mothe r--Charle s, I mean. I look exactly like my fathe r." She went on biting at he r cuticle. "My mothe r was quite a passionate woman. She was an extrovert. Fathe r was an introve rt. They we re quite we ll mated, though, in a superficial way. To be quite candid, Father really needed more of an inte llectual companion than Mother was. He was an extremely gifted genius." I waited, rece ptively, for further information, but none came. I looked down at Charles, who was now resting the side of his face on his chair seat. When he saw that I was looking at him, he close d his eyes, sleepily, angelically, then stuck out his tongue--

[ 41 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger an appendage of startling length--and gave out what in my country would have been a glorious tribute to a myopic baseball umpire. It fairly shook the tearoom. "Stop that," Esme said, clearly unshaken. "He saw an American do it in a fish-andchips queue, and now he does it whenever he's bore d. J ust stop it, now, or I shall send you directly to Miss Megley." Charles opened his enormous e yes, as sign that he'd heard his sister's threat, but othe rwise didn't look e specially alerted. He closed his eyes again, and continued to re st the side of his face on the chair seat. I me ntioned that maybe he ought to save it--meaning the Bronx cheer--till he starte d using his title regularly. That is, if he had a title, too. Esme gave me a long, faintly clinical look. "You have a dry se nse of humor, haven't you?" she said--wistfully. "Father said I have no sense of humor at all. He said I was unequipped to meet life be cause I have no se nse of humor." Watching her, I lit a cigare tte and said I didn't think a sense of humor was of any use in a real pinch. "Father said it was." This was a statement of faith, not a contradiction, and I quickly switched horses. I nodded and said her fathe r had probably taken the long view, while I was taking the short (whatever that meant). "Charles misses him exceedingly," Esme said, afte r a moment. "He was an e xceedingly lovable man. He was extremely handsome, too. Not that one's appearance matte rs greatly, but he was. He had te rribly penetrating eyes, for a man who was intransically kind." I nodded. I said I imagined he r father had had quite an extraordinary vocabulary. "Oh, yes; quite," said Esme. "He was an archivist--amateur, of course." At that point, I fe lt an importunate tap, almost a punch, on my uppe r arm, from Charles' direction. I turned to him. He was sitting in a fairly normal position in his chair now, except that he had one knee tucked unde r him. "What did one wall say to the othe r wall?" he asked shrilly. "It's a riddle!" I rolle d my eyes refle ctively ce ilingward and repeated the question aloud. Then I looked at Charles with a stumped expression and said I gave up. "Meet you at the corne r!" came the punch line, at top volume . It went over biggest with Charles himse lf. It struck him as unbearably funny. In fact, Esme had to come around and pound him on the back, as if treating him for a coughing spell. "Now, stop that," she said. She went back to her own seat. "He tells that same riddle to e veryone he meets and has a fit eve ry single time . Usually he drools when he laughs. Now, just stop, please ." "It's one of the best riddles I've heard, though," I said, watching Charles, who was very gradually coming out of it. In re sponse to this compliment, he sank considerably lower in his chair and again masked his face up to the eye s with a corner of the tablecloth. He then looked at me with his e xposed eyes, which were full of slowly subsiding mirth and the pride of someone who knows a really good riddle or two. "May I inquire how you we re employe d before ente ring the Army?" Esme asked me. I said I hadn't been e mployed at all, that I'd only been out of college a year but that I like to think of myself as a profe ssional short-story writer. She nodded politely. "Published?" she asked. It was a familiar but always touchy que stion, and one that I didn't answer just one, two, three . I started to explain how most editors in Ame rica were a bunch-"My fathe r wrote beautifully," Esme interrupted. "I'm saving a number of his lette rs for posterity." I said that sounded like a ve ry good idea. I happened to be looking at he r enormousface d, chronographic-looking wristwatch again. I asked if it had be longed to her fathe r. She looked down at he r wrist solemnly. "Ye s, it did," she said. "He gave it to me just be fore Charle s and I were evacuated." Se lf-consciously, she took her hands off the table, saying, "Pure ly as a momento, of course." She guide d the conve rsation in a diffe rent direction. "I'd be extremely flattered if you'd write a story exclusively for me sometime . I'm an avid reade r."

[ 42 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger I told her I ce rtainly would, if I could. I said that I wasn't te rribly prolific. "It doesn't have to be terribly prolific! Just so that it isn't childish and silly." She refle cted. "I pre fe r stories about squalor." "About what?" I said, leaning forward. "Squalor. I'm extremely interested in squalor." I was about to press her for more details, but I felt Charle s pinching me, hard, on my arm. I turned to him, wincing slightly. He was standing right next to me. "What did one wall say to the other wall?" he asked, not unfamiliarly. "You aske d him that," Esme said. "Now, stop it." Ignoring his siste r, and stepping up on one of my feet, Charle s re peate d the key question. I noticed that his necktie knot wasn't adjusted properly. I slid it up into place , then, looking him straight in the eye, suggeste d, "Meetcha at the corne r?" The instant I'd said it, I wishe d I hadn't. Charles' mouth fell open. I felt as if I'd struck it open. He stepped down off my foot and, with white-hot dignity, walked over to his own table, without looking back. "He's furious," Esme said. "He has a violent tempe r. My mother had a prope nsity to spoil him. My fathe r was the only one who didn't spoil him." I kept looking over at Charle s, who had sat down and started to drink his tea, using both hands on the cup. I hoped he'd turn around, but he didn't. Esme stood up. `Il faut que je parte aussi," she said, with a sigh. "Do you know French?" I got up from my own chair, with mixed fee lings of regre t and confusion. Esme and I shook hands; her hand, as I'd suspecte d, was a nervous hand, damp at the palm. I told he r, in English, how very much I'd enjoyed her company. She nodded. "I thought you might," she said. "I'm quite communicative for my age." She gave he r hair another experimental touch. "I'm dreadfully sorry about my hair," she said. "I've probably been hideous to look at." "Not at all! As a matter of fact, I think a lot of the wave is coming back already." She quickly touche d her hair again. "Do you think you'll be coming he re again in the immediate future?" she aske d. "We come here every Saturday, after choir practice ." I answe re d that I'd like nothing better but that, unfortunately, I was pre tty sure I wouldn't be able to make it again. "In othe r words, you can't discuss troop movements," said Esme. She made no move to leave the vicinity of the table. In fact, she crossed one foot over the othe r and, looking down, aligned the toes of he r shoes. It was a pre tty little execution, for she was wearing white socks and he r ankle s and feet we re lovely. She looked up at me abruptly. "Would you like me to write to you?" she asked, with a certain amount of color in he r face . "I write extreme ly articulate letters for a person my--" "I'd love it." I took out pe ncil and paper and wrote down my name, rank, serial number, and A.P.O. number. "I shall write to you first," she said, accepting it, "so that you don't feel compromise d in any way." She put the address into a pocket of he r dress. "Goodbye," she said, and walked back to her table . I orde red another pot of tea and sat watching the two of them till the y, and the harasse d Miss Megle y, got up to leave. Charles led the way out, limping tragically, like a man with one leg several, inches shorte r than the other. He didn't look over at me . Miss Megley went next, then Esme, who waved to me. I waved back, half getting up from my chair. It was a strange ly emotional moment for me . Less than a minute later, Esme came back into the tearoom, dragging Charles behind he r by the sleeve of his ree fe r. "Charles would like to kiss you goodbye," she said. I immediate ly put down my cup, and said that was ve ry nice, but was she sure? "Yes," she said, a trifle grimly. She let go Charles' sleeve and gave him a rathe r vigorous push in my direction. He came forward, his face livid, and gave me a loud, wet smacker just below the right ear. Following this ordeal, he started to make a beeline for the door and a le ss sentimental way of life, but 1 caught the half belt at the back of his reefer, he ld on to it, and asked him, "What did one wall say to the othe r wall?" His face lit up. "Meet you at the corner!" he shrieked, and raced out of the room, possibly in hyste rics.

[ 43 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Esme was standing with crossed ankle s again. "You're quite sure you won't forget to write that story for me?" she aske d. "It doesn't have to be exclusive ly for me. It can--" I said the re was absolutely no chance that I'd forget. I told he r that I'd never written a story for anybody, but that it seemed like exactly the right time to get down to it. She nodded. "Make it extreme ly squalid and moving," she suggested. "Are you at all acquainte d with squalor?" I said not exactly but that I was getting bette r acquainted with it, in one form or another, all the time, and that I'd do my best to come up to her specifications. We shook hands. "Isn't it a pity that we didn't meet unde r less extenuating circumstances?" I said it was, I said it certainly was. "Goodbye ," Esme said. "I hope you re turn from the war with all your faculties intact." I thanked her, and said a fe w other words, and then watched her leave the tearoom. She le ft it slowly, reflective ly, testing the ends of her hair for dryness. This is the squalid, or moving, part of the story, and the scene changes. The people change, too. I'm still around, but from he re on in, for reasons I'm not at libe rty to disclose , I've disguised myse lf so cunningly that even the cleverest re ade r will fail to recognize me. It was about te n-thirty at night in Gaufurt, Bavaria, several weeks afte r V-E Day. Staff Se rgeant X was in his room on the se cond floor of the civilian home in which he and nine other Ame rican soldiers had been quartered, even be fore the armistice. He was seated on a folding wooden chair at a small, messy-looking writing table , with a paperback overseas novel open be fore him, which he was having great trouble reading. The trouble lay with him, not the novel. Although the men who live d on the first floor usually had first grab at the books sent each month by Special Services, X usually seeme d to be le ft with the book he might have se lected himse lf. But he was a young man who had not come through the war with all his faculties intact, and for more than an hour he had been triple-reading paragraphs, and now he was doing it to the se ntences. He sudde nly closed the book, without marking his place. With his hand, he shie lded his e yes for a moment against the harsh, watty glare from the nake d bulb over the table. He took a cigarette from a pack on the table and lit it with fingers that bumpe d gently and incessantly against one anothe r. He sat back a trifle in his chair and smoked without any sense of taste . He had been chain-smoking for weeks. His gums ble d at the slightest pressure of the tip of his tongue , and he se ldom stopped e xpe rimenting; it was a little game he played, sometimes by the hour. He sat for a moment smoking and expe rimenting. Then, abruptly, familiarly, and, as usual, with no warning, he thought he felt his mind dislodge itself and teeter, like insecure luggage on an overhead rack. He quickly did what he had been doing for weeks to set things right: he pressed his hands hard against his temples. He he ld on tight for a mome nt. His hair needed cutting, and it was dirty. He had washe d it three or four times during his two weeks' stay at the hospital in Frankfort on the Main, but it had got dirty again on the long, dusty jeep ride back to Gaufurt. Corporal Z, who had calle d for him at the hospital, still d rove a jee p combat-style, with the windshie ld down on the hood, armistice or no armistice. The re we re thousands of new troops in Germany. By driving with his windshie ld down, combat-style, Corporal Z hope d to show that he was not one of them, that not by a long shot was he some ne w son of a bitch in the E.T.O. Whe n he let go of his head, X began to stare at the surface of the writing table , which was a catchall for at least two dozen unopened letters and at least five or six unope ned packages, all addre ssed to him. He reached behind the de bris and picked out a book that stood against the wall. It was a book by Goebbe ls, entitle d "Die Ze it Ohne Be ispiel." It be longed to the thirty-eight-year-old, unmarried daughter of the family that, up to a few weeks earlier, had been living in the house . She had been a low official in the Naz i Party, but high enough, by Army Regulations standards, to fall into an automatic-arrest category. X himself had arre sted he r. Now, for the third time since he had re turned from the hospital that day, he opened the woman's book and read the brie f inscription on the flyle af. Written in ink, in German, in a small, hope lessly sincere handwriting, were the

[ 44 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger words "Dear God, life is he ll." Nothing led up to or away from it. Alone on the page, and in the sickly stillness of the room, the words appeared to have the stature of an uncontestable, even classic indictment. X stared at the page for seve ral minutes, trying, against heavy odds, not to be taken in. The n, with far more zeal than he had done anything in weeks, he picked up a pe ncil stub and wrote down unde r the inscription, in English, "Fathe rs and teachers, I ponder `What is hell?' I maintain that it is the suffering of being unable to love ." He starte d to write Dostoevski's name under the inscription, but saw--with fright that ran through his whole body--that what he had written was almost entirely illegible . He shut the book. He quickly picked up something e lse from the table, a letter from his older brothe r in Albany. It had been on his table eve n before he had che cked into the hospital. He opene d the envelope, loose ly resolved to read the lette r straight through, but read only the top half of the first page. He stoppe d afte r the words "Now that the g.d. war is ove r and you probably have a lot of time ove r there, how about sending the kids a couple of bayonets or swastikas . . ." After he 'd torn it up, he looked down at the pie ces as they lay in the wastebasket. He saw that he had overlooked an enclosed snapshot. He could make out some body's feet standing on a lawn somewhere . He put his arms on the table and reste d his head on them. He ached from head to foot, all zones of pain seemingly interde pendent. He was rather like a Christmas tree whose lights, wired in se ries, must all go out if e ven one bulb is defective. The door bange d ope n, without having been rappe d on. X raise d his head, turned it, and saw Corporal Z standing in the door. Corporal Z had been X's jeep partne r and constant companion from D Day straight through five campaigns of the war. He live d on the first floor and he usually came up to see X when he had a few rumors or gripe s to unload. He was a huge , photogenic young man of twenty-four. During the war, a national magaz ine had photographed him in Hurtge n Forest; he had posed, more than just obligingly, with a Thanksgiving turkey in each hand. "Ya writin' le tters?" he aske d X. "It's spooky in here, for Chrissake." He prefe rred always to enter a room that had the overhead light on. X turne d around in his chair and asked him to come in, and to be careful not to step on the dog. "The what?" "Alvin. He 's right unde r your feet, Clay. How 'bout turning on the goddam light?" Clay found the ove rhead-light switch, flicked it on, then steppe d across the puny, se rvant's-size room and sat down on the edge of the bed, facing his host. His brick-re d hair, just combed, was dripping with the amount of water he require d for satisfactory grooming. A comb with a fountain-pen clip protrude d, familiarly, from the right-hand pocket of his olive-drab shirt. Ove r the le ft-hand pocket he was wearing the Combat Infantrymen's Badge (which, technically, he wasn't authorized to wear), the European Theatre ribbon, with five bronze battle stars in it (instead of a lone silver one, which was the equivalent of five bronze ones), and the pre -Pearl Harbor se rvice ribbon. He sighed heavily and said, "Christ almighty." It meant nothing; it was Army. He took a pack of cigare ttes from his shirt pocket, tapped one out, the n put away the pack and rebuttoned the pocket flap. Smoking, he looked vacuously around the room. His look finally settled on the radio. "Hey," he said. "They got this terrific show comin' on the radio in a coupla minutes. Bob Hope, and everybody." X, ope ning a fresh pack of cigarette s, said he had just turned the radio off. Undarkened, Clay watched X trying to get a cigare tte lit. "Jesus," he said, with spectator's enthusiasm, "you oughta see your goddam hands. Boy, have you got the shakes. Ya know that?" X got his cigare tte lit, nodded, and said Clay had a real eye for detail. "No kidding, hey. I goddam near fainted whe n I saw you at the hospital. You looked like a goddam corpse . How much weight ya lose? How many pounds? Ya know?" "I don't know. How was your mail when I was gone? You heard from Loretta?" Lore tta was Clay's girl. They intended to ge t married at their earliest convenience. She wrote to him fairly re gularly, from a paradise of triple exclamation points and inaccurate observations. All through the war, Clay had read all L oretta's letters aloud to

[ 45 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger X, howeve r intimate they we re --in fact, the more intimate, the be tter. It was his custom, after each reading, to ask X to plot out or pad out the le tter of reply, or to inse rt a few impre ssive words in French or Ge rman. "Yeah, I had a lette r from he r yesterday. Down in my room. Show it to ya later," Clay said, listlessly. He sat up straight on the edge of the bed, held his breath, and issue d a long, resonant be lch. Looking just semi-pleased with the achievement, he re laxed again. "Her goddam brother's gettin' outa the Navy on account of his hip," he said. "He 's got this hip, the bastard." He sat up again and trie d for another be lch, but with below-par results. A jot of ale rtne ss came into his face. "Hey. Before I forget. We gotta ge t up at five tomorrow and drive to Hamburg or someplace. Pick up Eisenhowe r jackets for the whole detachment." X, regarding him hostile ly, stated that he didn't want an Eise nhower jacke t. Clay looked surprise d, almost a trifle hurt. "Oh, they're good! They look good. How come?" "No reason. Why do we have to ge t up at five? The war's ove r, for God's sake ." "I don't know--we gotta get back be fore lunch. The y got some new forms in we gotta fill out be fore lunch.... I asked Bulling how come we couldn't fill 'em out tonight--he 's got the goddam forms right on his desk. He don't want to open the envelopes ye t, the son of a bitch." The two sat quiet for a moment, hating Bulling. Clay suddenly looke d at X with newhigher-interest than before. "Hey," he said. "Did you know the goddam side of your face is jumping all over the place ?" X said he knew all about it, and cove red his tic with his hand. Clay stared at him for a moment, then said, rather vividly, as if he were the beare r of exceptionally good news, "I wrote Loretta you had a nervous breakdown." "Oh?" "Yeah. She's inte rested as hell in all that stuff. She's majoring in psychology." Clay stretche d himself out on the bed, shoes included. "You know what she said? She says nobody ge ts a ne rvous breakdown just from the war and all. She says you probably we re unstable like, your whole goddam life ." X bridged his hands ove r his eyes--the light over the bed seemed to be blinding him-and said that Loretta's insight into things was always a joy. Clay glanced ove r at him. "L isten, ya bastard," he said. "She knows a goddam sight more psychology than you do." "Do you think you can bring yourse lf to take your stinking feet off my be d?" X aske d. Clay left his feet whe re they were for a few don't-te ll-me -where-to-put-my-feet se conds, then swung them around to the floor and sat up. "I'm goin' downstairs anyway. They got the radio on in Walke r's room." He didn't get up from the bed, though. "Hey. I was just tellin' that new son of a bitch, Bernstein, downstairs. Remembe r that time I and you drove into Valognes, and we got shelled for about two goddam hours, and that goddam cat I shot that jumped up on the hood of the jeep when we we re layin' in that hole? Remember?" "Yes--don't start that business with that cat again, Clay, God damn it. I don't want to hear about it." "No, all I mean is I wrote L oretta about it. She and the whole psychology class discussed it. In class and all. The goddam professor and e verybody." "That's fine . I don't want to hear about it, Clay." "No, you know the reason I took a pot shot at it, Loretta says? She says I was temporarily insane . No kidding. From the shelling and all." X threaded his fingers, once , through his dirty hair, the n shielde d his eyes against the light again. "You weren't insane . You were simply doing your duty. You kille d that pussycat in as manly a way as anybody could've unde r the circumstances." Clay looked at him suspiciously. "What the hell are you talkin' about?" "That cat was a spy. You had to take a pot shot at it. It was a very clever German midget dressed up in a cheap fur coat. So there was absolute ly nothing brutal, or cruel, or dirty, or even--" "God damn it!" Clay said, his lips thinned. "Can't you ever be since re ?"

[ 46 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger X suddenly fe lt sick, and he swung around in his chair and grabbed the wastebasket-just in time. When he had straightened up and turne d toward his guest again, he found him standing, embarrassed, halfway between the bed and the door. X started to apologize, but changed his mind and reached for his cigarette s. "C'mon down and listen to Hope on the radio, hey," Clay said, keeping his distance but trying to be friendly over it. "It'll do ya good. I mean it." "You go ahead, Clay. . . . I'll look at my stamp collection." "Yeah? You got a stamp collection? I didn't know you--" "I'm only kidding." Clay took a couple of slow steps toward the door. "I may drive over to Ehstadt later," he said. "They got a dance . It'll probably last till around two. Wanna go?" "No, thanks. . . . I may practice a few steps in the room." "O.K. G'night! Take it easy, now, for Chrissake ." The door slammed shut, then instantly opened again. "Hey. O.K. if I leave a letter to Loretta unde r your door? I got some German stuff in it. Willya fix it up for me?" "Yes. Leave me alone now, God damn it." "Sure," said Clay. "You know what my mothe r wrote me? She wrote me she's glad you and I were toge ther and all the whole war. In the same jee p and all. She says my lette rs are a he lluva lot more inte lligent since we been goin' around together." X looked up and ove r at him, and said, with great effort, "Thanks. Te ll her thanks for me." "I will. G'night!" The door slammed shut, this time for good. X sat looking at the door for a long while, then turned his chair around toward the writing table and picked up his portable typewriter from the floor. He made space for it on the messy table surface, pushing aside the collapsed pile of unopened lette rs and packages. He thought if he wrote a le tter to an old frie nd of his in New York there might be some quick, howe ve r slight, therapy in it for him. But he couldn't insert his notepaper into the roller properly, his finge rs we re shaking so viole ntly now. He put his hands down at his sides for a minute , then tried again, but finally crumpled the notepaper in his hand. He was aware that he ought to get the waste baske t out of the room, but instead of doing anything about it, he put his arms on the typewrite r and reste d his head again, closing his eyes. A few throbbing minutes later, when he opene d his eyes, he found himself squinting at a small, unope ned package wrapped in green paper. It had probably slipped off the pile when he had made space for the typewrite r. He saw that it had been readdressed se ve ral times. He could make out, on just one side of the package, at least three of his old A.P.O. numbers. He opened the package without any interest, without even looking at the return address. He opened it by burning the string with a lighted match. He was more intere sted in watching a string burn all the way down than in opening the package, but he opened it, finally. Inside the box, a note, written in ink, lay on top of a small obje ct wrapped in tissue paper. He picked out the note and read it. 17, ----ROAD, -----DEVON JUNE 7, 1944 DEAR SERGEANT X, I hope you will forgive me for having taken 38 days to begin our correspondence but, I have been extreme ly busy as my aunt has undergone stre ptococcus of the throat and nearly perished and I have been justifiably saddled with one responsibility after another. However I have thought of you fre quently and of the extremely pleasant afternoon we spent in each othe r's company on April 30, 1944 be tween 3:45 and 4:15 P.M. in case it slipped your mind.

[ 47 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger We are all tremendously e xcited and overawed about D Day and only hope that it will bring about the swift termination of the war and a me thod of existence that is ridiculous to say the least. Charle s and I are both quite conce rned about you; we hope you were not among those who made the first initial assault upon the Cotentin Pe ninsula. Were you? Please reply as speedily as possible . My warmest regards to your wife . Sincerely yours, ESMA P.S. I am taking the liberty of enclosing my wristwatch which you may keep in your possession for the duration of the conflict. I did not observe whether you we re wearing one during our brief association, but this one is extremely wate r-proof and shockproof as well as having many othe r virtue s among which one can te ll at what velocity one is walking if one wishes. I am quite ce rtain that you will use it to greate r advantage in these difficult days than I ever can and that you will accept it as a lucky talisman. Charles, whom I am teaching to read and write and whom I am finding an e xtremely intellige nt novice , wishes to add a few words. Please write as soon as you have the time and inclination. HELLO HELL O HELLO HELLO HELLO HELLO HELLO HELLO HELLO HELLO LOVE AND KISSES CHAL ES It was a long time be fore X could se t the note aside, le t alone lift Esme 's father's wristwatch out of the box. When he did finally lift it out, he saw that its crystal had been broken in transit. He wonde re d if the watch was otherwise undamaged, but he hadn't the courage to wind it and find out. He just sat with it in his hand for another long period. Then, suddenly, almost ecstatically, he fe lt sleepy. You take a really sleepy man, Esme , and he always stands a chance of again be coming a man with all his fac-with all his f-a-c-u-1-t-i-e-s intact.

[ 48 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

Pretty Mouth and Green My Eyes
WHEN the phone rang, the gray-haired man asked the girl, with quite some little de fe re nce , if she would rather for any reason he didn't answe r it. The girl heard him as if from a distance , and turned her face toward him, one eye --on the side of the light-closed tight, he r open eye ve ry, howeve r disingenuously, large, and so blue as to appear almost violet. The grayhaired man aske d her to hurry up, and she raised up on her right forearm just quickly enough so that the movement didn't quite look pe rfunctory. She cleared her hair back from her forehead with he r le ft hand and said, "God. I don't know. I mean what do you think?" The gray-haired man said he didn't see that it made a he lluva lot of difference one way or the other, and slippe d his le ft hand unde r the girl's supporting arm, above the e lbow, working his fingers up, making room for them be tween the warm surface s of her uppe r arm and chest wall. He reached for the phone with his right hand. To reach it without groping, he had to raise himse lf somewhat higher, which caused the back of his head to graze a comer of the lampshade. In that instant, the light was particularly, if rather vividly, flattering to his gray, mostly white , hair. Though in disarrangement at that moment, it had obviously been fre shly cut-or, rather, freshly maintained. The neckline and temple s had been trimmed conventionally close, but the sides and top had been left rather more than just longish, and we re , in fact, a trifle "distinguished-looking." "Hello?" he said resonantly into the phone. The girl stayed propped up on he r forearm and watched him. He r eyes, more just open than alert or spe culative , re fle cted chie fly their own size and color. A man's voice --stone dead, yet somehow rudely, almost obscenely quickened for the occasion--came through at the othe r end: "Lee? I wake you?" The gray-haired man glance d brie fly left, at the girl. "Who's that?" he aske d. "Arthur?" "Yeah--I wake you?" "No, no. I'm in be d, reading. Anything wrong?" "You sure I didn't wake you? Honest to God?" "No, no--absolutely," the gray-haire d man said. "As a matte r of fact, I've been averaging about four lousy hours--" "The reason I called, Lee, did you happen to notice when Joanie was leaving? Did you happe n to notice if she left with the Ellenbogens, by any chance?" The gray-haired man looked left again, but high this time , away from the girl, who was now watching him rather like a young, blue -eye d Irish policeman. "No, I didn't, Arthur," he said, his eyes on the far, dim end of the room, where the wall met the ce iling. "Didn't she leave with you?" "No. Christ, no. You didn't see he r leave at all, the n?" "We ll, no, as a matte r of fact, I didn't, Arthur," the gray-haire d man said. "Actually, as a matter of fact, I didn't see a bloody thing all evening. The minute I got in the door, I got myself involved in one long Je sus of a session with that French poop, Viennese poop--whatever the he ll he was. Every bloody one of the se foreign guys keep an eye open for a little free legal advice . Why? What's up? Joanie lost?" "Oh, Christ. Who knows? I don't know. You know her when she gets all tanke d up and rarin' to go. I don't know. She may have just--" "You call the Ellenbogens?" the gray-haired man aske d. "Yeah. They're not home yet. I don't know. Christ, I'm not e ven sure she le ft with them. I know one thing. I know one goddam thing. I'm through beating my brains out. I mean it. I really mean it this time . I'm through. Five years. Christ." "All right, try to take it a little easy, now, Arthur," the gray-haired man said. "In the first place , if I know the Elle nbogens, the y probably all hoppe d in a cab and went down to the Village for a couple of hours. All three of 'em'll probably barge--" "I have a feeling she went to work on some bastard in the kitchen. I just have a feeling. She always starts ne cking some bastard in the kitche n when she gets tanked up. I'm through. I swear to God I mean it this time . Five goddam-" "Where are you now, Arthur?" the gray-haire d man asked. "Home?" "Yeah. Home. Home sweet home. Christ."

[ 49 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "We ll, just try to take it a little --What are ya--drunk, or what?" "I don't know. How the hell do I know?" "All right, now, listen. Relax. Just relax," the grayhaired man said. "You know the Ellenbogens, for Chrissake. What probably happene d, they probably missed the ir last train. All three of 'em'll probably barge in on you any minute, full of witty, night-club--" "They drove in." "How do you know?" "Their baby-sitter. We've had some scintillating goddam conversations. We 're close as he ll. We 're like two goddam peas in a pod." "All right. All right. So what? Will ya sit tight and relax, now?" said the gray-haire d man. "All three of 'em'll probably waltz in on you any minute. Take my word. You know Leona. I don't know what the he ll it is --they all get this god-awful Connecticut gaiety when they get in to New York. You know that." "Yeah. I know. I know. I don't know, though." "Certainly you do. Use your imagination. The two of 'e m probably dragged Joanie bodily--" "Listen. Nobody e ver has to drag Joanie anywhere . Don't gimme any of that dragging stuff." "Nobody's giving you any dragging stuff, Arthur," the gray-haired man said quie tly. "I know, I know! Excuse me. Christ, I'm losing my mind. Honest to God, you sure I didn't wake you?" "I'd te ll you if you had, Arthur," the gray-haired man said. Absently, he took his left hand out from be tween the girl's upper arm and che st wall. "Look, Arthur. You want my advice?" he said. He took the telephone cord between his fingers, just under the transmitter. "I mean this, now. You want some advice ?" "Yeah. I don't know. Christ, I'm kee ping you up. Why don't I just go cut my--" "Listen to me a minute ," the gray-haire d man said. "First--I me an this, now--get in be d and relax. Make yourself a nice , big nightcap, and get under the --" "Nightcap! Are you kidding? Christ, I've killed about a quart in the last two goddam hours. Nightcap! I'm so plaste red now I can hardly--" "All right. All right. Get in bed, then," the grayhaired man said. "And relax--ya hear me? Tell the truth. Is it going to do any good to sit around and stew?" "Yeah, I know. I wouldn't even worry, for Chrissake, but you can't trust he r! I swear to God. I swear to God you can't. You can trust her about as far as you can throw a--I don't know what. Aaah, what's the use? I'm losing my goddam mind." "All right. Forget it, now. Forget it, now. Will ya do me a favor and try to put the whole thing out of your mind?" the gray-haire d man said. "For all you know, you're making--I honestly think you're making a mountain--" "You know what I do? You know what I do? I'm ashameda tell ya, but you know what I very nearly goddam do eve ry night? When I get home ? You want to know?" "Arthur, listen, this isn't---" "Wait a se cond--I'll tell ya, God damn it. I practically have to keep myself from opening every goddam closet door in the apartment--I swear to God. Every night I come home , I half expect to find a bunch of bastards hiding all over the place . Elevator boys. Delive ry boys. Cops--" "All right. All right. Let's try to take it a little easy, Arthur," the gray-haired man said. He glanced abruptly to his right, whe re a cigarette, lighted some time earlier in the evening, was balance d on an ashtray. It obviously had gone out, though, and he didn't pick it up. "In the first place ," he said into the phone, "I've told you many, many times, Arthur, that's e xactly where you make your biggest mistake . You know what you do? Would you like me to tell you what you do? You go out of your way--I mean this, now-you actually go out of your way to torture yourself. As a matter of fact, you actually inspire Joanie-" He broke off. "You're bloody lucky she 's a wonde rful kid. I mean it. You give that kid absolutely no cre dit for having any good taste--or brains, for Chrissake, for that matter--" "Brains! Are you kidding? She hasn't got any goddam brains! She's an animal!"

[ 50 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger The gray-haired man, his nostrils dilating, appeared to take a fairly deep breath. "We're all animals," he said. "Basically, we're all animals." "Like he ll we are. I'm no goddam animal. I may be a stupid, foule d-up twentiethce ntury son of a bitch, but I'm no animal. Don't gimme that. I'm no animal." "Look, Arthur. This isn't getting us--" "Brains. Jesus, if you knew how funny that was. She thinks she's a goddam intelle ctual. That's the funny part, that's the hilarious part. She reads the theatrical page, and she watches television till she's practically blind--so she's an intelle ctual. You know who I'm marrie d to? You want to know who I'm married to? I'm marrie d to the greate st living undeveloped, undiscovered actress, novelist, psychoanalyst, and allaround goddam unappreciated ce le brity-genius in New York. You didn't know that, didja? Christ, it's so funny I could cut my throat. Madame Bovary at Columbia Extension School. Madame--" "Who?" asked the gray-haire d man, sounding annoyed. "Madame Bovary takes a course in Te levision Appreciation. God, if you knew how--" "All right, all right. You realize this isn't getting us anyplace ," the gray-haire d man said. He turned and gave the girl a sign, with two fingers near his mouth, that he wanted a cigare tte. "In the first place," he said, into the phone, "for a helluvan intellige nt guy, you're about as tactless as it's humanly possible to be." He straighte ned his back so that the girl could reach behind him for the cigarettes. "I mean that. It shows up in your private life , it shows up in your--" "Brains. Oh, God, that kills me! Christ almightyl Did you ever hear her describe anybody--some man, I mean? Some time when you haven't anything to do, do me a favor and get her to de scribe some man for you. She describes every man she sees as `terribly attractive .' It can be the olde st, crummiest, gre asiest-"All right, Arthur," the gray-haired man said sharply. "This is getting us nowhere. But nowhere." He took a lighte d cigarette from the girl. She had lit two. "Just incidentally," he said, exhaling smoke through his nostrils, "how'd you make out today?" "What?" "How'd you make out today?" the gray-haired man repeated. "How'd the case go?" "Oh, Christ! I don't know. Lousy. About two minutes be fore I'm all se t to start my summation, the attorney for the plaintiff, L issberg, trots in this crazy chambermaid with a bunch of be dsheets as evidence --be dbug stains all ove r them. Christ!" "So what happened? You lose?" asked the grayhaired man, taking another drag on his cigare tte. "You know who was on the bench? Mother Vittorio. What the hell that guy has against me, I'll never know. I can't even open my mouth and he jumps all over me . You can't reason with a guy like that. It's impossible." The gray-haired man turned his head to see what the girl was doing. She had picke d up the ashtray and was putting it between them. "You lose, then, or what?" he said into the phone . "What?" "I said, Did you lose?" "Yeah. I was gonna tell you about it. I didn't get a chance at the party, with all the ruckus. You think Junior'll hit the ce iling? Not that I give a good goddam, but what do you think? Think he will?" With his left hand, the gray-haire d man shape d the ash of his cigare tte on the rim of the ashtray. "I don't think he'll nece ssarily hit the ce iling, Arthur," he said quietly. "Chances are very much in favor, though, that he's not going to be ove rjoyed about it. You know how long we 've handled those three bloody hotels? Old man Shanle y himse lf started the whole --" "I know, I know. Junior's told me about it at le ast fifty times. It's one of the most be autiful storie s I e ver heard in my life. All right, so I lost the goddam case . In the first place, it wasn't my fault. First, this lunatic Vittorio baits me all through the trial. The n this moron chambermaid starts passing out sheets full of bedbug--" "Nobody's saying it's your fault, Arthur," the grayhaired man said. "You asked me if I thought Junior would hit the ce iling. I simply gave you an honest--"

[ 51 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "I know--I know that.... I don't know. What the hell. I may go back in the Army anyway. I tell you about that?" The gray-haired man turned his head again toward the girl, perhaps to show he r how forbearing, even stoic, his countenance was. But the girl missed seeing it. She had just overturned the ashtray with her knee and was rapidly, with her finge rs, brushing the spilled ashes into a little pick-up pile; her e yes looke d up at him a second too late . "No, you didn't, Arthur," he said into the phone. "Yeah. I may. I don't know yet. I'm not crazy about the idea, naturally, and I won't go if I can possibly avoid it. But I may have to. I don't know. At least, it's oblivion. If they gimme back my little helmet and my big, fat desk and my nice, big mosquito ne t it might not--" "I'd like to beat some sense into that head of yours, boy, that's what I'd like to do," the gray-haired man said. "For a he lluvan--For a supposedly inte lligent guy, you talk like an absolute child. And I say that in all sincerity. You let a bunch of minor little things snowball to an extent that they get so bloody paramount in your mind that you're absolutely unfit for any--" "I shoulda left he r. You know that? I should've gone through with it last summe r, when I really had the ball rolling--you know that? You know why I didn't? You want to know why I didn't?" "Arthur. For Chrissake . This is ge tting us e xactly nowhere." "Wait a se cond. Lemme tellya why! You want to know why I didn't? I can tellya exactly why. Because I fe lt sorry for her. That's the whole simple truth. I fe lt sorry for her." "We ll, I don't know. I mean that's out of my jurisdiction," the gray-haired man said. "It seems to me, though, that the one thing you seem to forget is that Joanie's a grown woman. I don't know, but it seems to me--" "Grown woman! You crazy? She 's a grown child, for Chrissake! L isten, I'll be shaving-liste n to this--I'll be shaving, and all of a sudden she'll call me from way the hell the othe r end of the apartment. I'll go see what's the matter--right in the middle of shaving, lather all over my goddam face. You know what she'll want? She'll want to ask me if I think she has a good mind. I swear to God. She's pathetic, I tellya. I watch her when she's asleep, and I know what I'm talkin' about. Believe me." "We ll, that's something you know bette r than--I mean that's out of my jurisdiction," the gray-haired man said. "The point is, God damn it, you don't do anything at all constructive to--" "We 're mismate d, that's all. That's the whole simple story. We 're just mismate d as he ll. You know what she needs? She needs some big silent bastard to just walk ove r once in a while and knock her out cold--then go back and finish reading his pape r. That's what she needs. I'm too goddam weak for her. I knew it when we got married--I swear to God I did. I mean you're a smart bastard, you've never been marrie d, but e very now and then, be fore anybody gets married, they ge t these flashes of what it's going to be like after they're marrie d. I ignored 'em. I ignored all my goddam flashes. I'm weak. That's the whole thing in a nutshell." "You're not weak. You just don't use your head," the gray-haire d man said, acce pting a freshly lighted cigare tte from the girl. "Certainly I'm weak! Certainly I'm weak! God damn it, I know whethe r I'm weak or not! If I weren't weak, you don't think I'd've let everything get all--Aah, what's the usea talking? Certainly I'm weak ... God, I'm keeping you awake all night. Why don't you hang the he ll up on me? I mean it. Hang up on me ." "I'm not going to hang up on you, Arthur. I'd like to help you, if it's humanly possible ," the gray-haired man said. "Actually, you're your own worst--" "She doesn't re spect me. She doesn't even love me , for God's sake. Basically--in the last analysis--I don't love he r any more , e ithe r. I don't know. I do and I don't. It varies. It fluctuates. Christ! Eve ry time I ge t all set to put my foot down, we have dinner out, for some reason, and I meet her somewhere and she comes in with these goddam white gloves on or something. I don't know. Or I start thinking about the first time we drove up to New Haven for the Princeton game. We had a flat right after we got off the Parkway, and it was cold as hell, and she he ld the flashlight while I fixed the goddam

[ 52 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger thing--You know what I mean. I don't know. Or I start thinking about--Christ, it's embarrassing--I start thinking about this goddam poem I sent he r when we first started goin' around togethe r. `Rose my color is. and white, Pretty mouth and gree n my eyes.' Christ, it's embarrassing--it use d to remind me of her. She doesn't have green eye s--she has eyes like goddam sea shells, for Chrissake --but it reminded me anyway ... I don't know. What's the usea talking? I'm losing my mind. Hang up on me, why don't you? I mean it." The gray-haired man cleared his throat and said, "I have no intention of hanging up on you, Arthur. There's just one --" "She bought me a suit once. With her own money. I te ll you about that?" "No, I--" "She just went into I think Tripler's and bought it. I didn't e ven go with he r. I mean she has some goddam nice traits. The funny thing was it wasn't a bad fit. I just had to have it taken in a little bit around the seat--the pants--and the length. I mean she has some goddam nice traits." The gray-haired man listened anothe r moment. Then, abruptly, he turned toward the girl. The look he gave her, though only glancing, fully informed he r what was suddenly going on at the other end of the phone. "Now, Arthur. Listen. That isn't going to do any good," he said into the phone . "That isn't going to do any good. I mean it. Now, listen. I say this in all sincerity. Willya get undressed and get in bed, like a good guy? And re lax? Joanie'll probably be there in about two minutes. You don't want her to see you like that, do ya? The bloody Ellenbogens'll probably barge in with her. You don't want the whole bunch of 'em to see you like that, do ya?" He liste ned. "Arthur? You hear me?" "God, I'm kee ping you awake all night. Eve rything I do, I--" "You're not kee ping me awake all night," the grayhaired man said. "Don't even think of that. I've already told you, I've been averaging about four hours' sleep a night. What I would like to do, though, if it's at all humanly possible, I'd like to help you, boy." He liste ned. "Arthur? You the re?" "Yeah. I'm he re . Listen. I've kept you awake all night anyway. Could I come over to your place for a drink? Wouldja mind?" The gray-haired man straightened his back and placed the flat of his free hand on the top of his head, and said, "Now, do you mean?" "Yeah. I mean if it's all right with you. I'll only stay a minute. I'd just like to sit down somewhere and--I don't know. Would it be all right?" "Yeah, but the point is I don't think you should, Arthur," the gray-haired man said, lowe ring his hand from his head. "I mean you're more than welcome to come, but I honestly think you should just sit tight and relax till J oanie waltzes in. I hone stly do. What you want to be , you want to be right there on the spot when she waltzes in. Am I right, or not?" "Yeah. I don't know. I swear to God, I don't know." "We ll, I do, I honestly do," the gray-haired man said. "Look. Why don't you hop in bed now, and re lax, and then later, if you feel like it, give me a ring. I mean if you feel like talking. And don't worry. That's the main thing. Hear me? Willya do that now?" "All right." The gray-haired man continued for a moment to hold the phone to his ear, then lowe re d it into its cradle. "What did he say?" the girl immediately aske d him. He picked his cigare tte out of the ashtray--that is, se le cted it from an accumulation of smoke d and halfsmoke d cigarettes. He dragged on it and said, "He wanted to come over here for a drink." "God! What'd you say?" said the girl. "You heard me," the gray-haired man said, and looked at her. "You could hear me . Couldn't you?" He squashed out his cigarette. "You we re wonde rful. Absolutely marve llous," the girl said, watching him. "God, I feel like a dog!" "We ll," the gray-haired man said, "it's a tough situation. I don't know how marvellous I was."

[ 53 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "You we re . You were wonderful," the girl said. "I'm limp. I'm absolute ly limp. Look at me!" The gray-haired man looked at he r. "Well, actually, it's an impossible situation," he said. "I mean the whole thing's so fantastic it isn't even--" "Darling- Excuse me ," the girl said quickly, and leaned forward. "I think you're on fire." She gave the back of his hand a short, brisk, brushing stroke with the flats of her fingers. "No. It was just an ash." She leaned back. "No, you were marvellous," she said. "God, I feel like an absolute dog!" "We ll, it's a very, very tough situation. The guy's obviously going through absolute--" The phone suddenly rang. The gray-haired man said "Christ!" but picke d it up before the se cond ring. "Hello?" he said into it. "Lee ? Were you aslee p?" "No, no." "Listen, I just thought you'd want to know. Joanie just barged in." "What?" said the gray-haired man, and bridged his left hand over his eyes, though the light was be hind him. "Yeah. She just barged in. About ten se conds after I spoke to you. I just thought I'd give you a ring while she 's in the john. Listen, thanks a million, Lee. I mean it--you know what I mean. You weren't aslee p, were ya?" "No, no. I was just--No, no," the gray-haired man said, leaving his fingers bridge d ove r his eyes. He cleared his throat. "Yeah. What happened was, apparently Leona got stinking and then had a goddam crying jag, and Bob wante d Joanie to go out and grab a drink with them somewhere and iron the thing out. I don't know. You know. Very involved. Anyway, so she's home. What a rat race . Honest to God, I think it's this goddam New York. What I think maybe we 'll do, if e verything goes along all right, we 'll get ourse lves a little place in Connecticut maybe. Not too far out, nece ssarily, but far enough that we can lead a normal goddam life. I mean she 's crazy about plants and all that stuff. She'd probably go mad if she had he r own goddam garde n and stuff. Know what I mean? I mean--exce pt you--who do we know in New York except a bunch of neurotics? It's bound to unde rmine e ven a normal pe rson soone r or late r. Know what I mean?" The gray-haired man didn't give an answer. His eyes, behind the bridge of his hand, we re closed. "Anyway, I'm gonna talk to he r about it tonight. Or tomorrow, maybe . She's still a little under the weather. I mean she's a he lluva good kid basically, and if we have a chance to straighten ourselves out a little bit, we 'd be goddam stupid not to at least have a go at it. While I'm at it, I'm also gonna try to straighten out this lousy be dbug mess, too. I've been thinking. I was just wonde ring, Lee. You think if I went in and talked to Junior pe rsonally, I could--" "Arthur, if you don't mind, I'd appreciate --" "I mean I don't want you to think I just called you back or anything because I'm worried about my goddam job or anything. I'm not. I mean basically, for Chrissake, I couldn't care less. I just thought if I could straighten Junior out without beating my brains out, I'd be a goddam fool--" "Listen, Arthur," the gray-haired man interrupted, taking his hand away from his face , "I have a he lluva headache all of a sudden. I don't know where I got the bloody thing from. You mind if we cut this short? I'll talk to you in the morning--all right?" He liste ned for anothe r moment, then hung up. Again the girl immediate ly spoke to him, but he didn't answe r he r. He picke d a burning cigarette --the girl's--out of the ashtray and started to bring it to his mouth, but it slippe d out of his finge rs. The girl trie d to he lp him re trieve it before anything was burned, but he told he r to just sit still, for Chrissake, and she pulled back her hand.

[ 54 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

De Daumier-Smith's Blue Period
IF IT MADE any real sense --and it doesn't even begin to--I think I might be inclined to de dicate this account, for whatever it's worth, especially if it's the least bit ribald in parts, to the memory of my late, ribald stepfathe r, Robe rt Agadganian, Jr. Bobby--as everyone, even I, called him--die d in 1947, surely with a few regrets, but without a single gripe , of thrombosis. He was an adventurous, e xtre mely magnetic, and generous man. (After having spe nt so many years laboriously begrudging him those picaresque adje ctives, I fee l it's a matter of life and death to get them in he re .) My mothe r and fathe r were divorced during the winter of 1928, when I was eight, and mothe r married Bobby Agadganian late that spring. A year late r, in the Wall Stree t Crash, Bobby lost everything he and mother had, with the exception, apparently, of a magic wand. In any case , practically overnight, Bobby turned himself from a dead stockbroker and incapacitated bon vivant into a live , if somewhat unqualifie d, age ntappraiser for a society of indepe nde nt Ame rican art galleries and fine arts museums. A few weeks later, early in 1930, our rather mixed three some move d from New York to Paris, the bette r for Bobby to ply his new trade . Being a cool, not to say an ice -cold, ten at the time, I took the big move, so far as I know, untraumatically. It was the move back to New York, nine years late r, three months after my mothe r died, that threw me, and thre w me te rribly. I remember a significant incident that occurred just a day or two after Bobby and I arrived in New York. I was standing up in a very crowded Lexington Avenue bus, holding on to the ename l pole near the driver's seat, buttocks to buttocks with the chap be hind me. For a numbe r of blocks the drive r had re peatedly given those of us bunched up near the front door a curt orde r to "step to the rear of the vehicle." Some of us had tried to oblige him. Some of us hadn't. At length, with a red light in his favor, the harasse d man swung around in his seat and looked up at me , just behind him. At nine teen, I was a hatless type, with a flat, black, not particularly clean, Continentaltype pompadour over a badly broken-out inch of forehead. He addressed me in a lowe re d, an almost prudent tone of voice. "All right, buddy," he said, "let's move that ass." It was the "buddy," I think, that did it. Without e ven bothering to bend ove r a little --that is, to keep the conversation at least as private, as de bon gout, as he'd kept it--I informed him, in French, that he was a rude, stupid, ove rbearing imbecile, and that he 'd never know how much I de tested him. Then, rather e late d, I stepped to the rear of the vehicle. Things got much worse. One afternoon, a week or so later, as I was coming out of the Ritz Hotel, whe re Bobby and I were indefinite ly stopping, it seemed to me that all the seats from all the buse s in New York had been unscre wed and taken out and se t up in the street, where a monstrous game of Musical Chairs was in full swing. I think I might have been willing to join the game if I had been grante d a spe cial dispensation from the Church of Manhattan guaranteeing that all the othe r players would remain re spectfully standing till I was seated. When it became clear that nothing of the kind was forthcoming, I took more direct action. I prayed for the city to be cleare d of people , for the gift of being alone--a-l-o-n-e : which is the one New York prayer that rare ly gets lost or delayed in channe ls, and in no time at all everything I touched turned to solid lone line ss. Mornings and early afternoons, I attende d--bodily--an art school on Fortyeighth and Lexington Avenue, which I loathed. (The week before Bobby and I had le ft Paris, I had won three first-prize awards at the National Junior Exhibition, he ld at the Freiburg Gallerie s. Throughout the voyage to America, I used our state room mirror to note my uncanny physical resemblance to El Greco.) Three late afternoons a week I spent in a dentist's chair, whe re , within a pe riod of a few months, I had eight teeth extracted, three of them front one s. The othe r two afte rnoons I usually spe nt wande ring through art galle ries, mostly on Fifty-seventh Street, where I did all but hiss at the Ame rican entries. Evenings, I generally read. I bought a comple te set of the Harvard Classics--chiefly be cause Bobby said we didn't have room for them in our suite--and

[ 55 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger rather perverse ly read all fifty volumes. Nights, I almost invariably se t up my ease l be tween the twin beds in the room I shared with Bobby, and painted. In one month alone, according to my diary for 1939, I completed e ighteen oil paintings. Noteworthily enough, seventeen of them we re self-portraits. Some times, however, possibly when my Muse was being capricious, I se t aside my paints and drew cartoons. One of them I still have. It shows a cavernous view of the mouth of a man be ing attended by his dentist. The man's tongue is a simple, U.S. Treasury hundre d dollar bill, and the dentist is saying, sadly, in French, "I think we can save the molar, but I'm afraid that tongue will have to come out." It was an enormous favorite of mine. As roommates, Bobby and I were neither more nor less compatible than would be , say, an exceptionally live -and-let-live Harvard se nior, and an exceptionally unpleasant Cambridge newsboy. And when, as the wee ks went by, we gradually discove re d that we we re both in love with the same deceased woman, it was no help at all. In fact, a ghastly little after-you-Alphonse relationship grew out of the discovery. We began to e xchange vivacious smile s when we bumped into each other on the threshold of the bathroom. One week in May of 1939, about ten months after Bobby and I che cked into the Ritz, I saw in a Quebec newspaper (one of sixteen Fre nch-language newspape rs and pe riodicals I had blown myself a subscription to) a quarte r-column advertisement that had been placed by the direction of a Montreal corre sponde nce art school. It advised all qualified instructors--it as much as said, in fact, that it couldn't advise them fortenwnt enough--to apply immediate ly for employment at the newest, most progressive , correspondence art school in Canada. Candidate instructors, it stipulate d, we re to have a fluent knowle dge of both the French and English languages, and only those of tempe rate habits and unque stionable characte r need apply. The summe r session at Les Amis Des Vie ux Maitre s was officially to open on 10 June . Samples of work, it said, should re present both the academic and comme rcial fie lds of art, and were to be submitted to Monsie ur I. Yoshoto, directeur, formerly of the Impe rial Academy of Fine Arts, Tokyo. Instantly, fee ling almost insupportably qualifie d, I got out Bobby's Hermes-Baby typewriter from unde r his bed and wrote, in French, a long, intemperate le tter to M. Yoshoto--cutting all my morning classes at the art school on Lexington Avenue to do it. My opening paragraph ran some three pages, and very nearly smoked. I said I was twenty-nine and a great-nephew of Honore Daumier. I said I had just left my small estate in the South of France, following the death of my wife, to come to America to stay--temporarily, I made it clear--with an invalid re lative . I had been painting, I said, since early childhood, but that, following the advice of Pablo Picasso, who was one of the oldest and dearest frie nds of my parents, I had ne ve r exhibite d. However, a number of my oil paintings and wate r colors we re now hanging in some of the finest, and by no means nouveau riche, homes in Paris, whe re the y had gagne conside rable attention from some of the most formidable critics of our day. Following, I said, my wife 's untimely and tragic death, of an ulceration cancgreuse, I had earnestly thought I would ne ve r again set brush to canvas. But re cent financial losses had led me to alter my earnest re solution. I said I would be most honored to submit sample s of my work to Les Amis Des Vie ux Maitre s, just as soon as they we re sent to me by my agent in Paris, to whom I would write, of course , tres presse. I remained, most re spectfully, Jean de Daumie r-Smith. It took me almost as long to select a pseudonym as it had taken me to write the whole lette r. I wrote the le tter on overlay tissue paper. However, I seale d it in a Ritz envelope . Then, after applying a special-de livery stamp I'd found in Bobby's top drawer, I took the le tter down to the main mail drop in the lobby. I stopped on the way to put the mail clerk (who unmistakably loathed me) on the alert for de Daumier-Smith's future incoming mail. Then, around two-thirty, I slipped into my one -forty-five anatomy class at the art school on Forty-e ighth Street. My classmates seeme d, for the first time , like a fairly de cent bunch.

[ 56 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger During the next four days, using all my spare time, plus some time that didn't quite be long to me, I drew a dozen or more samples of what I thought we re typical e xample s of American commercial art. Working mostly in washe s, but occasionally, to show off, in line, I dre w people in e vening clothe s stepping out of limousines on opening nights-lean, erect, super-chic couples who had obviously never in their lives inflicte d suffe ring as a result of unde rarm care le ssness--couple s, in fact, who perhaps didn't have any underarms. I drew suntanned young giants in white dinner jacke ts, seated at white tables alongside turquoise swimming pools, toasting each other, rather excitedly, with highballs made from a cheap but ostensibly ultrafashionable brand of rye whisky. I drew ruddy, billboard-genic children, beside themse lves with delight and good health, holding up their empty bowls of breakfast food and pleading, good-naturedly, for more. I drew laughing, high-breasted girls aquaplaning without a care in the world, as a result of being amply protected against such national evils as blee ding gums, facial blemishes, unsightly hairs, and faulty or inadequate life insurance. I dre w housewives who, until they reache d for the right soap flakes, laid themselves wide open to straggly hair, poor posture , unruly children, disaffected husbands, rough (but slender) hands, untidy (but enormous) kitche ns. Whe n the sample s were finished, I mailed them immediately to M. Yoshoto, along with a half-dozen or so non-comme rcial paintings of mine that I'd brought with me from France. I also enclosed what I thought was a very casual note that only just began to tell the richly human little story of how, quite alone and variously handicapped, in the purest romantic tradition, I had reached the cold, white , isolating summits of my profession. The next few days were horribly suspenseful, but be fore the week was out, a lette r came from M. Yoshoto accepting me as an instructor at Les Amis Des Vieux Maitres. The le tter was written in English, even though I had written in French. (I later gathered that M. Yoshoto, who knew French but not English, had, for some reason, assigned the writing of the le tter to Mme. Yoshoto, who had some working knowle dge of English.) M. Yoshoto said that the summer session would probably be the busie st session of the year, and that it starte d on 24 J une . This gave me almost five weeks, he pointed out, to se ttle my affairs. He offered me his unlimited sympathy for, in effect, my recent emotional and financial setbacks. He hoped that I would arrange myse lf to report at Les Amis Des Vie ux Maitre s on Sunday, 23 June, in order to learn of my duties and to be come "firm frie nds" with the othe r instructors (who, I late r learned, we re two in number, and consisted of M. Yoshoto and Mme. Yoshoto). He deeply regretted that it was not the school's policy to advance transportation fare to ne w instructors. Starting salary was twenty-eight dollars a week-which was not, M. Yoshoto said he realized, a ve ry large sum of funds, but since it included bed and nourishing food, and since he se nsed in me the true vocationary spirit, he hoped I would not feel cast down with vigor. He awaite d a te le gram of formal acceptance from me with eagerness and my arrival with a spirit of ple asantne ss, and remaine d, since re ly, my ne w friend and employer, I. Yoshoto, formerly of the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts, Tokyo. My telegram of formal acceptance went out within five minutes. Oddly enough, in my excitement, or quite possibly from a fee ling of guilt because I was using Bobby's phone to send the wire, I de libe rate ly sat on my prose and kept the message down to ten words. That e vening when, as usual, I met Bobby for dinne r at seven o'clock in the Oval Room, I was annoyed to see that he 'd brought a gue st along. I hadn't said or implie d a word to him about my re cent, extracurricular doings, and I was dying to make this final ne ws-break--to scoop him thoroughly--when we were alone. The guest was a very attractive young lady, then only a few months divorced, whom Bobby had been seeing a lot of and whom I'd me t on seve ral occasions. She was an altogether charming pe rson whose eve ry attempt to be friendly to me, to ge ntly persuade me to take off my armor, or at le ast my helmet, I chose to inte rpret as an implied invitation to join her in be d at my earliest convenience--that is, as soon as Bobby, who clearly was too old for he r, could be given the slip. I was hostile and laconic throughout dinner. At length, while we we re

[ 57 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger having coffee, I te rse ly outline d my new plans for the summer. When I'd finished, Bobby put a couple of quite intelligent questions to me. I answered them coolly, overly brie fly, the unimpeachable crown prince of the situation. "Oh, it sounds ve ry exciting!" said Bobby's guest, and waite d, wantonly, for me to slip he r my Montreal address under the table . "I thought you were going to Rhode Island with me," Bobby said. "Oh, darling, don't be a horrible we t blanket," Mrs. X said to him. "I'm not, but I wouldn't mind knowing a little more about it," Bobby said. But I thought I could tell from his manne r that he was already mentally exchanging his train rese rvations for Rhode Island from a compartment to a lower berth. "I think it's the sweetest, most complimentary thing I ever heard in my life ," Mrs. X said warmly to me. He r eyes sparkled with depravity. The Sunday that I stepped on to the platform at Windsor Station in Montreal, I was wearing a double breasted, beige gabardine suit (that I had a damned high opinion of), a navy-blue flannel shirt, a solid ye llow, cotton tie, brown-and-white shoes, a Panama hat (that be longed to Bobby and was rather too small for me), and a reddish-brown moustache, aged three weeks. M. Yoshoto was there to meet me. He was a tiny man, not more than five feet tall, wearing a rather soiled linen suit, black shoes, and a black felt hat with the brim turned up all around. He neithe r smiled, nor, as I remembe r, said anything to me as we shook hands. His e xpression--and my word for it came straight out of a French edition of Sax Rohme r's Fu Manchu books--was inscrutable . For some reason, I was smiling from ear to ear. I couldn't even turn it down, le t alone off. It was a bus ride of seve ral mile s from Windsor Station to the school. I doubt if M. Yoshoto said five words the whole way. Eithe r in spite , or because, of his silence, I talked incessantly, with my legs crossed, ankle on knee , and constantly using my sock as an absorber for the perspiration on my palm. It seemed urge nt to me not only to reite rate my earlier lies--about my kinship with Daumie r, about my de cease d wife , about my small estate in the South of France--but to elaborate on them. At length, in effect to spare myself from dwelling on these painful reminiscences (and they were be ginning to feel a little painful), I swung ove r to the subject of my parents' olde st and de arest friend: Pablo Picasso. Le pauvre Picasso, as I referred to him. (I picked Picasso, I might mention, because he seemed to me the French painter who was best-known in Ame rica. I roundly considered Canada part of America.) For M. Yoshoto's benefit, I recalled, with a showy amount of natural compassion for a fallen giant, how many times I had said to him, "M. Picasso, ofi allez vous?" and how, in response to this allpe netrating question, the maste r had never faile d to walk slowly, leadenly, across his studio to look at a small reproduction of his "Les Saltimbanques" and the glory, long forfe ited, that had been his. The trouble with Picasso, I explained to M. Yoshoto as we got out of the bus, was that he neve r listened to anybody--e ven his closest frie nds. In 1939, Les Amis Des V ieux Maitres occupied the second floor of a small, highly unendowed-looking, three -story building--a tenement building, really--in the Ve rdun, or least attractive, section of Montreal. The school was directly over an orthopedic appliances shop. One large room and a tiny, boltless latrine we re all there was to Les Amis Des Vie ux Maitre s itse lf. Nonethe less, the mome nt I was inside , the place seemed wondrously pre sentable to me . There was a very good reason. The walls of the "instructors' room" were hung with many framed pictures--all wate r colors--done by M. Yoshoto. Occasionally, I still dre am of a certain white goose flying through an extremely pale -blue sky, with--and it was one of the most daring and accomplished feats of craftsmanship I've ever seen--the blueness of the sky, or an e thos of the blueness of the sky, reflected in the bird's feathers. The picture was hung just behind Mme. Yoshoto's de sk. It made the room--it and one or two othe r pictures close to it in quality. Mme. Yoshoto, in a be autiful, black and ce rise silk kimono, was sweeping the floor with a short-handled broom when M. Yoshoto and I entered the instructors' room. She was a gray-haired woman, surely a head taller than her husband, with features that looked rather more Malayan than Japanese. She left off swee ping and came forward, and M. Yoshoto briefly introduced us. She seemed to me every bit as inscrutable as M.

[ 58 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Yoshoto, if not more so. M. Yoshoto then offe re d to show me to my room, which, he explained (in French) had re cently been vacated by his son, who had gone to British Columbia to work on a farm. (Afte r his long silence in the bus, I was grate ful to hear him speak with any continuity, and I listened rather vivaciously.) He started to apologize for the fact that there were no chairs in his son's room--only floor cushions-but I quickly gave him to be lie ve that for me this was little short of a godsend. (In fact, I think I said I hated chairs. I was so nervous that if he had informed me that his son's room was flooded, night and day, with a foot of wate r, I probably would have let out a little cry of pleasure. I probably would have said I had a rare foot disease, one that required my keeping my feet we t eight hours daily.) The n he led me up a creaky wooden staircase to my room. I told him on the way, pointedly e nough, that I was a student of Buddhism. I later found out that both he and Mme. Yoshoto were Presbyterians. Late that night, as I lay awake in bed, with Mme . Yoshoto's Japanese-Malayan dinner still en masse and riding my ste rnum like an e le vator, one or the other of the Yoshotos be gan to moan in his or her sleep, just the other side of my wall. It was a high, thin, broken moan, and it seemed to come le ss from an adult than from either a tragic, subnormal infant or a small malformed animal. (It became a re gular nightly pe rformance. I never did find out which of the Yoshotos it came from, let alone why.) Whe n it became quite unendurable to listen to from a supine position, I got out of bed, put on my slippe rs, and went over in the dark and sat down on one of the floor cushions. I sat crosslegged for a couple of hours and smoked cigarettes, squashing them out on the instep of my slippe r and putting the stubs in the breast pocket of my pyjamas. (The Yoshotos didn't smoke , and there were no ashtrays anywhe re on the premises.) I got to sleep around five in the morning. At six-thirty, M. Yoshoto knocked on my door and advised me that breakfast would be se rved at six-forty-five. He asked me, through the door, if I'd slept we ll, and I answe red, "Oui!" I then dressed--putting on my blue suit, which I thought appropriate for an instructor on the opening day of school, and a red Sulka tie my mothe r had given me -and, without washing, hurried down the hall to the Yoshotos' kitchen. Mme. Yoshoto was at the stove, preparing a fish breakfast. M. Yoshoto, in his B.V .D.'s and trousers, was seated at the kitchen table, re ading a Japanese newspape r. He nodded to me , non-committally. Neithe r of them had e ver looked more inscrutable. Presently, some sort of fish was served to me on a plate with a small but noticeable trace of coagulated catsup along the border. Mme. Yoshoto asked me , in English--and he r accent was unexpectedly charming--if I would pre fer an e gg, but I said, "Non, non, madame--me rci!" I said I neve r ate eggs. M. Yoshoto leane d his newspaper against my water glass, and the three of us ate in silence; that is, they ate and I systematically swallowed in silence. Afte r breakfast, without having to leave the kitche n, M. Yoshoto put on a collarless shirt and Mme. Yoshoto took off her apron, and the three of us filed rather awkwardly downstairs to the instructors' room. There, in an untidy pile on M. Yoshoto's broad de sk, lay some dozen or more unopened, enormous, bulging, Manilla enve lopes. To me, they had an almost fre shly brushed-and-combed look, like ne w pupils. M. Yoshoto assigned me to my desk, which was on the far, isolate d side of the room, and asked me to be seated. Then, with Mme. Yoshoto at his side, he broke open a few of the envelopes. He and Mme. Yoshoto seemed to examine the assorted contents with some sort of method, consulting each other, now and then, in Japanese, while I sat across the room, in my blue suit and Sulka tie, trying to look simultaneously ale rt and patient and, somehow, indispensable to the organization. I took out a handful of soft-lead drawing pe ncils, from my inside jacket pocket, that I'd brought from New York with me, and laid them out, as noiselessly as possible , on the surface of my desk. Once, M. Yoshoto glance d ove r at me for some reason, and I flashe d him an excessive ly winning smile . Then, suddenly, without a word or a look in my dire ction, the two of them sat down at their respective desks and went to work. It was about seven-thirty. Around nine, M. Yoshoto took off his glasses, got up and padde d ove r to my desk with a sheaf of pape rs in his hand. I'd spent an hour and a half doing absolutely nothing but trying to keep my stomach from growling audibly. I quickly stood up as he came into

[ 59 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger my vicinity, stooping a trifle in orde r not to look disrespectfully tall. He handed me the sheaf of pape rs he'd brought over and asked me if I would kindly translate his written corrections from French into English. I said, "Oui, monsieur!" He bowe d slightly, and padded back to his own desk. I pushed my handful of soft-lead drawing pencils to one side of my desk, took out my fountain pen, and fell--very nearly heartbroken--to work. Like many a re ally good artist, M. Yoshoto taught drawing not a whit bette r than it's taught by a so-so artist who has a nice flair for teaching. With his practical overlay work--that is to say, his tracing-pape r drawings imposed over the student's drawings-along with his written comments on the backs of the drawings--he was quite able to show a reasonably talente d student how to draw a recognizable pig in a re cognizable sty, or e ven a picture sque pig in a picturesque sty. But he couldn't for the life of him show anyone how to draw a beautiful pig in a beautiful sty (which, of course , was the one little technical bit his be tter students most greedily wanted sent to them through the mail). It was not, nee d I add, that he was consciously or unconsciously be ing frugal of his tale nt, or deliberately unprodigal of it, but that it simply wasn't his to give away. For me, the re was no real element of surprise in this ruthle ss truth, and so it didn't waylay me. But it had a ce rtain cumulative e ffect, conside ring whe re I was sitting, and by the time lunch hour rolle d around, I had to be ve ry careful not to smudge my translations with the sweaty heels of my hands. As if to make things still more oppressive, M. Yoshoto's handwriting was just barely legible. At any rate , whe n it came time for lunch, I de clined to join the Yoshotos. I said I had to go to the post office. Then I almost ran down the stairs to the street and began to walk very rapidly, with no direction at all, through a maze of strange, unde rprivilege d-looking streets. When I came to a lunch bar, I went inside and bolted four "Coney Island Red-Hots" and three muddy cups of coffee. On the way back to Le s Amis Des V ieux Maitres, I began to wonder, first in a familiar, faint-hearte d way that I more or less knew from experience how to handle, then in an absolute panic, if the re had been anything personal in M. Yoshoto's having used me exclusively as a translator all morning. Had old Fu Manchu known from the beginning that I was wearing, among other misleading attachments and e ffects, a nine teen-yearold boy's moustache? The possibility was almost unendurable to consider. It also tended to eat slowly away at my sense of justice. He re I was--a man who had won three first-prizes, a very close friend of Picasso's (which I actually was beginning to think I was)--being use d as a translator. The punishment didn't begin to fit the crime . For one thing, my moustache , howeve r sparse, was all mine; it hadn't been put on with spirit gum. I felt it reassuringly with my finge rs as I hurrie d back to school. But the more I thought about the whole affair, the faster I walked, till finally I was almost trotting, as if any minute I half-expe cted to be stoned from all directions. Though I'd taken only forty minutes or so for lunch, both the Yoshotos were at their desks and at work when I got back. The y didn't look up or give any sign that they'd heard me come in. Perspiring and out of breath, I went ove r and sat down at my desk. I sat rigidly still for the next fifteen or twenty minute s, running all kinds of brand-new little Picasso anecdotes through my head, just in case M. Yoshoto suddenly got up and came over to unmask me . And, suddenly, he did get up and come over. I stood up to meet him--head on, if ne cessary-with a fre sh little Picasso story, but, to my horror, by the time he reached me I was minus the plot. I chose the moment to express my admiration for the goose-in-flight picture hanging over Mme . Yoshoto. I praised it lavishly at some length. I said I knew a man in Paris--a very wealthy paralytic, I said--who would pay M. Yoshoto any price at all for the picture . I said I could get in touch with him immediate ly if M. Yoshoto was intere sted. Luckily, however, M. Yoshoto said the picture be longed to his cousin, who was away visiting relatives in Japan. The n, before I could express my regret, he asked me--addressing me as M. Daumie rSmith--if I would kindly correct a few le ssons. He we nt over to his de sk and re turned with three enormous, bulging e nve lopes, and placed them on my desk. Then, while I stood daze d and incessantly nodding and feeling my jacket where my drawing pe ncils had been repocketed, M. Yoshoto explained to me the school's me thod of instruction (or, rather, its nonexistent method of instruction). Afte r he 'd returned to his own desk, it took me several minutes to pull myse lf togethe r.

[ 60 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger All three students assigned to me were English-language students. The first was a twenty-three-year-old Toronto housewife, who said he r professional name was Bambi Kramer, and advised the school to address her mail accordingly. All ne w students at Les Amis Des Vie ux Maitre s were requested to fill out questionnaire forms and to enclose photographs of themse lves. Miss Kramer had enclosed a glossy, eight by ten print of he rself wearing an ankle t, a straple ss bathing suit, and a white -duck sailor's cap. On he r que stionnaire form she stated that her favorite artists we re Rembrandt and Walt Disney. She said she only hoped that she could some day emulate them. He r sample drawings were clippe d, rather subordinately, to he r photograph. All of them were arre sting. One of them was unforge ttable . The unforge ttable one was done in florid wash colors, with a caption that read: "Forgive Them Their Trespasses." It showed three small boys fishing in an odd-looking body of water, one of the ir jacke ts draped over a "No Fishing!" sign. The tallest boy, in the foreground of the picture, appeared to have rickets in one leg and elephantiasis in the othe r--an e ffe ct, it was clear, that Miss Kramer had deliberate ly use d to show that the boy was standing with his feet slightly apart. My se cond student was a fifty-six-year-old "society photographer" from Windsor, Ontario, named R. Howard Ridgefie ld, who said that his wife had been after him for years to branch over into the painting racket. His favorite artists were Rembrandt, Sargent, and "Titan," but he added, advisedly, that he himself didn't care to draw along those line s. He said he was mostly inte rested in the satiric rather than the arty side of painting. To support this credo, he submitted a goodly number of original drawings and oil paintings. One of his picture s--the one I think of as his major picture --has been as recallable to me, over the years, as, say, the lyrics of "Sweet Sue" or "Let Me Call You Sweetheart." It satirize d the familiar, everyday tragedy of a chaste young girl, with be lowshoulde r-length blond hair and udde r-size breasts, be ing criminally assaulted in church, in the ve ry shadow of the altar, by her minister. Both subjects' clothe s were graphically in disarray. Actually, I was much less struck by the satiric implications of the picture than I was by the quality of workmanship that had gone into it. If I hadn't known they we re living hundreds of miles apart, I might have sworn Ridge field had had some purely technical help from Bambi Krame r. Except under pre tty rare circumstance s, in any crisis, when I was nineteen, my funny bone invariably had the distinction of being the very first part of my body to assume partial or comple te paralysis. Ridge fie ld and Miss Kramer did many things to me, but they didn't come at all close to amusing me. Three or four times while I was going through the ir e nvelopes, I was tempted to ge t up and make a formal protest to M. Yoshoto. But I had no clear idea just what sort of form my protest might take. I think I was afraid I might ge t over to his de sk only to report, shrilly: "My mother's dead, and I have to live with her charming husband, and nobody in New York speaks French, and there aren't any chairs in your son's room. How do you expect me to teach these two craz y people how to draw?" In the end, being long se lf-trained in taking despair sitting down, I managed very easily to keep my seat. I opened my third student's envelope. My third student was a nun of the orde r of Sisters of St. Jose ph, named Siste r Irma, who taught "cooking and drawing" at a convent elementary school just outside Toronto. And I haven't any good ideas concerning whe re to start to describe the contents of he r enve lope. I might just first me ntion that, in place of a photograph of herse lf, Siste r Irma had enclose d, without explanation, a snapshot of he r convent. It occurs to me , too, that she le ft blank the line in her questionnaire where the student's age was to be fille d in. Otherwise , he r questionnaire was fille d out as perhaps no questionnaire in this world de se rves to be filled out. She had been born and raise d in Detroit, Michigan, where her father had been a "che cker for Ford automobiles." Her academic education consiste d of one year of high school. She had had no formal instruction in drawing. She said the only reason she was teaching it was that Sister somebody had passed on and Fathe r Zimmermann (a name that particularly caught my e ye , because it was the name of the de ntist who had pulled out eight of my teeth)-Father Zimmermann had picked he r to fill in. She said she had "34 kittys in my cooking class and 18 kittys in my drawing class." He r hobbies we re loving her Lord and the Word of her Lord and "collecting leaves but

[ 61 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger only when they are laying right on the ground." He r favorite painter was Douglas Bunting. (A name, I don't mind saying, I've tracked down to many a blind alley, ove r the years.) She said he r kittys always like d to "draw people when they are running and that is the one thing I am terrible at." She said she would work ve ry hard to learn to draw be tter, and hoped we would not be ve ry impatient with he r. There were, in all, only six samples of he r work enclosed in the envelope . (All of her work was unsigned--a minor e nough fact, but at the time , a disproportionately refre shing one. Bambi Kramer's and Ridgefie ld's picture s had all been either signed or-and it somehow seemed even more irritating--initialled.) After thirteen years, I not only distinctly remembe r all six of Sister Irma's samples, but four of them I some times think I remember a trifle too distinctly for my own peace of mind. Her best picture was done in water colors, on brown paper. (Brown paper, espe cially wrapping paper, is ve ry pleasant, ve ry cosy to paint on. Many an experience d artist has used it when he wasn't up to anything grand or grandiose.) The picture, despite its confining size (it was about ten by twelve inche s), was a highly detailed depiction of Christ be ing carried to the se pulchre in Joseph of Arimathea's garden. In the far right fore ground, two men who seeme d to be Joseph's servants were rathe r awkwardly doing the carrying. Jose ph of Arimathea followed directly behind them--be aring himself, under the circumstances, pe rhaps a trifle too e rectly. At a respe ctably subordinate distance behind Jose ph came the women of Galilee , mixed in with a motley, pe rhaps gate-crashing crowd of mourne rs, spectators, children, and no less than three frisky, impious mongrels. For me, the major figure in the picture was a woman in the le ft fore ground, facing the viewer. With he r right hand raised overhead, she was frantically signalling to someone-he r child, perhaps, or he r husband, or possibly the viewer--to drop e ve rything and hurry ove r. Two of the women, in the front rank of the crowd, wore halos. Without a Bible handy, I could only make a rough guess at the ir ide ntity. But I immediate ly spotte d Mary Magdalene . At any rate, I was positive I had spotted he r. She was in the middle foreground, walking apparently self-detached from the crowd, he r arms down at he r side s. She wore no part of her grief, so to speak, on her sleeve--in fact, the re we re no outward signs at all of he r late , enviable connections with the Deceased. Her face, like all the othe r faces in the picture, had been done in a cheap-price d, ready-made fle sh-tint. It was painfully clear that Sister Irma herse lf had found the color unsatisfactory and had tried he r unadvised, noble best to tone it down somehow. The re we re no other serious flaws in the picture. None, that is, worthy of anything but cavilling mention. It was, in any conclusive sense, an artist's picture , steepe d in high, high, organized talent and God knows how many hours of hard work. One of my first reactions, of course , was to run with Siste r Irma's enve lope over to M. Yoshoto. But, once again, I ke pt my seat. I didn't care to risk having Sister Irma taken away from me. At length, I just closed he r enve lope with care and placed it to one side of my desk, with the exciting plan to work on it that night, in my own time . Then, with far more tolerance than I'd thought I had in me, almost with good will, I spent the rest of the afte rnoon doing overlay corre ctions on some male and female nudes (sans sex organs) that R. Howard Ridgefie ld had genteely and obscenely drawn. Toward dinner time, I opened three buttons of my shirt and stashed away Siste r Irma's enve lope where neither thieves, nor, just to play safe , the Yoshotos, could break in. A tacit but iron-bound procedure covered all evening meals at Les Amis Des V ieux MaR res. Mme . Yoshoto got up from her desk promptly at five-thirty and went upstairs to pre pare dinner, and Mr. Yoshoto and I followe d--fell into single file , as it we re --at six sharp. There were no side trips, however essential or hygienic. That evening, however, with Siste r Irma's enve lope warm against my chest, I had never felt more relaxe d. In fact, all through dinne r, I couldn't have been more outgoing. I gave away a lulu of a Picasso story that had just reached me , one that I might have put aside for a rainy day. M. Yoshoto scarcely lowered his Japanese newspape r to listen to it, but Mme. Yoshoto seeme d re sponsive , or, at least, not unresponsive. In any case, when I was finishe d with it, she spoke to me for the first time since she had asked me that morning if I would like an egg. She asked me if I we re sure I wouldn't like a chair in my room. I said quickly,

[ 62 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "Non, non-me rci, madame ." I said that the way the floor cushions we re set right up against the wall, it gave me a good chance to practice keeping my back straight. I stood up to show her how sway-backed I was. Afte r dinner, while the Yoshotos we re discussing, in J apanese, some perhaps provocative topic, I asked to be excused from the table . M. Yoshoto looked at me as if he we ren't quite sure how I'd got into his kitchen in the first place, but nodded, and I walked quickly down the hall to my room. When I had turned on the ove rhead light and closed the door behind me , I took my drawing pe ncils out of my pocket, then took off my jacket, unbuttoned my shirt, and sat down on a floor cushion with Siste r Irma's enve lope in my hands. Till past four in the morning, with everything I neede d spread out be fore me on the floor, I attended to what I thought were Sister Irma's immediate , artistic wants. The first thing I did was to make some ten or twelve pencil sketches. Rather than go downstairs to the instructors' room for drawing paper, I drew the sketches on my pe rsonal notepaper, using both sides of the sheet. When that was done, I wrote a long, almost an endless, le tter. I've been as saving as an e xce ptionally neurotic magpie all my life, and I still have the next-to-the-last draft of the letter I wrote to Siste r Irma that June night in 1939. I could reproduce all of it he re verbatim, but it isn't necessary. I used the bulk of the le tter, and I mean bulk, to suggest whe re and how, in her major picture, she'd run into a little trouble, e specially with he r colors. I listed a few artist's supplies that I thought she couldn't do without, and included approximate costs. I asked her who Douglas Bunting was. I asked whe re I could see some of his work. I asked he r (and I knew what a long shot it was) if she had ever seen any reproductions of paintings by Antone llo da Messina. I aske d her to please tell me how old she was, and assure d her, at great length, that the information, if given, wouldn't go be yond myself. I said the only reason that I was asking was that the information would he lp me to instruct he r more efficiently. Virtually in the same breath, I aske d if she were allowed to have visitors at he r convent. The last few lines (or cubic fee t) of my lette r should, I think, be re produced he re -syntax, punctuation, and all. . . . Incide ntally, if you have a command of the French language, I hope you will let me know as I am able to express myself very precise ly in that language, having spent the greate r part of my youth chiefly in Paris, France. Since you are quite obviously conce rned about drawing running figures, in orde r to convey the technique to your pupils at the Convent, I am enclosing a few sketches I have drawn myse lf that may be of use. You will see that I have drawn them rather rapidly and they are by no means perfe ct or even quite commendable, but I be lieve they will show you the rudiments about which you have expressed interest. Unfortunate ly the director of the school does not have any system in the me thod of teaching here, I am ve ry much afraid. I am delighted that you are already so we ll advanced, but I have no idea what he expects me to do with my other students who are very retarded and chiefly stupid, in my opinion. Unfortunately, I am an agnostic; however, I am quite an admirer of St. Francis of Assisi from a distance, it goes without saying. I wonde r if perhaps you are thoroughly acquainte d with what he (St. Francis of Assisi) said when they were about to cauterise one of his e yeballs with a red-hot, burning iron? He said as follows: "Brother Fire, God made you beautiful and strong and use ful; I pray you be courteous to me." You paint slightly the way he spoke, in many pleasant ways, in my opinion. Incidentally, may I ask if the young lady in the foreground in the blue outfit is Mary Magdalene? I mean in the picture we have been discussing, of course . If she is not, I have been sadly deluding myself. Howeve r, this is no nove lty. I hope you will conside r me entire ly at your disposal as long as you are a student at Les Amis Des V ieux Maitres. Frankly, I think you are greatly tale nted and would not even be slightly startle d if you developed into a genius before many years have gone by. I would not falsely encourage you in this matte r. That is one reason why I asked you if

[ 63 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger the young lady in the foreground in the blue outfit was Mary Magdalene, because if it was, you were using your incipient genius somewhat more than your religious inclinations, I am afraid. However, this is nothing to fear, in my opinion. With sincere hope that you are enjoying completely pe rfect health, I am, Ve ry respectfully yours, (signe d) JEAN DE DAUMIER-SMITH Staff Instructor Les Amis Des V ieux Maltres P.S. I have nearly forgotten that students are supposed to submit enve lopes e ve ry se cond Monday to the school. For your first assignment will you kindly make some outdoor ske tches for me? Do them ve ry freely and do not strain. I am unaware, of course, how much time they give you for your pe rsonal drawing at your Convent and hope you will advise me. Also I beg you to buy those necessary supplie s I took the liberty of advocating, as I would like you to begin using oils as soon as possible. If you will pardon my saying so, I be lie ve you are too passionate to paint just in wate rcolors and never in oils indefinite ly. I say that quite impe rsonally and do not mean to be obnoxious; actually, it is intended as a compliment. Also please send me all of your old former work that you have on hand, as I am eager to see it. The days will be insufferable for me till your ne xt e nve lope arrives, it goe s without saying. If it is not ove rstepping myself, I would greatly appreciate your te lling me if you find be ing a nun very satisfactory, in a spiritual way, of course. Frankly, I have been studying various re ligions as a hobby eve r since I read volumes 36, 44, 45 of the Harvard Classics, which you may be acquainte d with. I am especially de lighte d with Martin Luthe r, who was a Prote stant, of course. Please do not be offende d by this. I advocate no doctrine ; it is not my nature to do so. As a last thought, please do not forget to advise me as to your visiting hours, as my weeke nds are free as far as I know and I may happen to be in your environs some Saturday by chance . Also please do not forget to inform me if you have a reasonable command of the French language , as for all intents and purposes I am comparative ly speechless in English owing to my varie d and largely insensible upbringing. I mailed my lette r and drawings to Sister Irma around three-thirty in the morning, going out to the street to do it. Then, literally ove rjoyed, I undressed myself with thick fingers and fe ll into be d. Just be fore I fe ll asleep, the moaning sound again came through the wall from the Yoshotos' bedroom. I pictured both Yoshotos coming to me in the morning and asking me, begging me , to hear their se cret proble m out, to the last, te rrible detail. I saw exactly how it would be. I would sit down between them at the kitchen table and listen to each of them. I would listen, liste n, listen, with my head in my hands--till finally, unable to stand it any longe r, I would reach down into Mme. Yoshoto's throat, take up he r heart in my hand and warm it as I would a bird. Then, when all was put right, I would show Siste r Irma's work to the Yoshotos, and they would share my joy. The fact is always obvious much too late, but the most singular diffe rence between happine ss and joy is that happiness is a solid and joy a liquid. Mine starte d to seep through its container as early as the next morning, when M. Yoshoto dropped by at my de sk with the enve lope s of two new students. I was working on Bambi Kramer's drawings at the time , and quite spleenlessly, knowing as I did that my le tter to Sister Irma was safely in the mail. But I was no where even nearly prepared to face the freakish fact that the re we re two people in the world who had less talent for drawing than e ither Bambi or R. Howard Ridgefield. Feeling virtue go out of me , I lit a cigare tte in the instructors' room for the first time since I'd joined the staff. It seemed to he lp, and I turne d back to Bambi's work. But be fore I'd taken more than three or four drags, I felt, without actually glancing up and ove r, that M. Yoshoto was looking at me . Then, for confirmation, I heard his chair being pushe d back. As usual, I got up to meet him when he came over. He explaine d to me, in a bloody irritating whispe r, that he

[ 64 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger pe rsonally had no objection to smoking, but that, alas, the school's policy was against smoking in the instructors' room. He cut short my profuse apologie s with a magnanimous wave of his hand, and went back over to his and Mme . Yoshoto's side of the room. I wondered, in a real panic, how I would manage to get sane ly through the next thirteen days to the Monday when Siste r Irma's next envelope was due. That was Tue sday morning. I spent the rest of the working day and all the working portions of the next two days keeping myse lf fe verishly busy. I took all of Bambi Kramer's and R . Howard Ridgefield's drawings apart, as it we re , and put them together with brand-new parts. I designed for both of them literally dozens of insulting, subnormal, but quite constructive, drawing exercise s. I wrote long le tters to them. I almost begged R. Howard Ridge fie ld to give up his satire for a while . I aske d Bambi, with maximum delicacy, to please hold off, temporarily, submitting any more drawings with titles kindred to "Forgive Them Their Trespasse s." Then, Thursday mid-afternoon, feeling good and jumpy, I starte d in on one of the two new students, an Ame rican from Bangor, Maine, who said in his questionnaire, with wordy, Honest-John integrity, that he was his own favorite artist. He refe rred to himself as a re alist-abstractionist. As for my after-school hours, Tuesday evening I took a bus into Montreal proper and sat through a Cartoon Festival Wee k program at a third-rate movie house--which largely entailed being a witness to a succession of cats being bombarded with champagne corks by mice gangs. We dnesday evening, I gathered up the floor cushions in my room, piled them three high, and tried to sketch from memory Siste r Irma's picture of Christ's burial. I'm tempted to say that Thursday e vening was peculiar, or pe rhaps macabre , but the fact is, I have no bill-filling adjectives for Thursday e vening. I le ft Les Amis after dinner and went I don't know where--perhaps to a movie, perhaps for just a long walk; I can't remember, and, for once , my diary for 1939 lets me down, too, for the page I need is a total blank. I know, though, why the page is a blank. As I was returning from whereve r I'd spent the evening--and I do remember that it was after dark--I stoppe d on the side walk outside the school and looked into the lighted display window of the orthope dic appliances shop. Then something altogether hideous happened. The thought was force d on me that no matter how coolly or sensibly or gracefully I might one day learn to live my life, I would always at best be a visitor in a garde n of enamel urinals and bedpans, with a sightle ss, wooden dummy-de ity standing by in a marked-down rupture truss. The thought, certainly, couldn't have been endurable for more than a few seconds. I remember fleeing upstairs to my room and getting undressed and into bed without so much as opening my diary, much less making an entry. I lay awake for hours, shivering. I listene d to the moaning in the next room and I thought, forcibly, of my star pupil. I tried to visualize the day I would visit her at he r convent. I saw he r coming to mee t me--near a high, wire fence--a shy, beautiful girl of eighteen who had not ye t taken her final vows and was still free to go out into the world with the Peter Abelard-type man of her choice. I saw us walking slowly, silently, toward a far, ve rdant part of the convent grounds, where suddenly, and without sin, I would put my arm around he r waist. The image was too ecstatic to hold in place, and, finally, I let go, and fell asleep. I spent all of Friday morning and most of the afternoon at hard labor trying, with the use of ove rlay tissue, to make recognizable trees out of a forest of phallic symbols the man from Bangor, Maine, had consciously drawn on expensive line n pape r. Mentally, spiritually, and physically, I was fee ling pretty torpid along toward four-thirty in the afternoon, and I only half stood up when M. Yoshoto came over to my de sk for an instant. He handed something to me--hande d it to me as impersonally as the average waiter distributes menus. It was a lette r from the Mothe r Superior of Siste r Irma's convent, informing M. Yoshoto that Father Zimmermann, through circumstances outside his control, was forced to alte r his de cision to allow Siste r Irma to study at Les Amis Des Vie ux Maitre s. The writer said she deeply regretted any inconveniences or

[ 65 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger confusions this change of plans might cause the school. She sincerely hoped that the first tuition payment of fourteen dollars might be refunded to the diocese. The mouse, I've been sure for years, limps home from the site of the burning ferris wheel with a brand-new, airtight plan for killing the cat. After I'd read and reread and then, for great, long minutes, stared at the Mother Supe rior's letter, I suddenly broke away from it and wrote lette rs to my four remaining students, advising them to give up the idea of be coming artists. I told them, individually, that they had absolutely no talent worth developing and that they were simply wasting the ir own valuable time as well as the school's. I wrote all four le tters in Fre nch. When I was finishe d, I immediate ly went out and mailed them. The satisfaction was short-lived, but ve ry, ve ry good while it lasted. Whe n it came time to join the parade to the kitche n for dinne r, I asked to be e xcused. I said I wasn't fee ling we ll. (I lied, in 1939, with far greater conviction than I told the truth--so I was positive that M. Yoshoto looked at me with suspicion when I said I wasn't fee ling we ll.) Then I went up to my room and sat down on a cushion. I sat there for sure ly an hour, staring at a daylit hole in the window blind, without smoking or taking off my coat or loosening my necktie. Then, abruptly, I got up and brought over a quantity of my personal notepape r and wrote a second lette r to Siste r Irma, using the floor as a desk. I neve r mailed the letter. The following re production is copied straight from the original. Montreal, Canada June 28, 1939 DEAR SISTER IR MA, Did I, by chance, say anything obnoxious or irreve re nt to you in my last le tter that reached the attention of Fathe r Zimmermann and caused you discomfort in some way? If this is the case , I beg you to give me at least a reasonable chance to re tract whatever it was I may have unwittingly said in my ardor to be come frie nds with you as well as student and teacher. Is this asking too much? I do not be lieve it is. The bare truth is as follows: If you do not learn a few more rudiments of the profession, you will only be a ve ry, ve ry interesting artist the rest of your life instead of a great one. This is terrible, in my opinion. Do you realize how grave the situation is? It is possible that Father Zimme rmann made you resign from the school because he thought it might inte rfere with your being a compete nt nun. If this is the case , I cannot avoid saying that I think it was very rash of him in more ways than one. It would not interfe re with your being a nun. I live like an e vil-minded monk myself. The worst that be ing an artist could do to you would be that it would make you slightly unhappy constantly. Howe ver, this is not a tragic situation, in my opinion. The happiest day of my life was many years ago when I was seventeen. I was on my way for lunch to meet my mothe r, who was going out on the stree t for the first time afte r a long illne ss, and I was feeling ecstatically happy when suddenly, as I was coming in to the Avenue V ictor Hugo, which is a street in Paris, I bumpe d into a chap without any nose. I ask you to please consider that factor, in fact I beg you. It is quite pregnant with meaning. It is also possible that Fathe r Zimmermann cause d you to stop matriculating for the reason pe rhaps that your convent lacks funds to pay the tuition. I frankly hope this is the case , not only because it relie ves my mind, but in a practical sense . If this is indeed the case , you have only to say the word and I will offer my services gratis for an inde finite period of time. Can we discuss this matter furthe r? May I ask again when your visiting days at the convent are? May I be free to plan to visit you at the convent next Saturday afternoon, July 6, be tween 3 an d 5 o'clock in the afternoon, dependent upon the schedule of trains between Montreal and Toronto? I await your reply with great anxiety. With respect and admiration, Sincerely yours, (signe d) JEAN DE DAUMIER-SMITH

[ 66 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Staff Instructor Les Amis Des V ieux Maltres P.S. In my last le tter I casually asked if the young lady in the blue outfit in the foreground of your religious picture was Mary Magdalene, the sinner. If you have not as ye t replied to my letter, please go on refraining. It is possible that I was mistaken and I do not willfully invite any disillusions at this point in my life. I am willing to stay in the dark. Even today, as late as now, I have a tendency to wince whe n I remember that I brought a dinner suit up to Les Amis with me. But bring one I did, and after I'd finished my lette r to Siste r Irma, I put it on. The whole affair seemed to call out for my getting drunk, and since I had neve r in my life been drunk (for fe ar that excessive drinking would shake the hand that painte d the picture s that copped the three first prizes, e tc.), I felt compe lled to dress for the tragic occasion. While the Yoshotos we re still in the kitchen, I slippe d downstairs and telephoned the Windsor Hote l--which Bobby's friend, Mrs. X, had re commended to me before I'd left Ne w York. I reserved a table for one , for e ight o'clock. Around seven-thirty, dresse d and slicked up, I stuck my head outside my door to see if either of the Yoshotos were on the prowl. I didn't want them to see me in my dinner jacket, for some reason. The y weren't in sight, and I hurried down to the stree t and be gan to look for a cab. My lette r to Siste r Irma was in the inside pocket of my jacket. I intended to read it ove r at dinne r, pre fe rably by candlelight. I walked block afte r block without so much as see ing a cab at all, let alone an empty one. It was rough going. The Ve rdun section of Montreal was in no sense a dressy ne ighborhood, and I was convinced that every passe r-by was giving me a second, basically ce nsorious look. When, finally, I came to the lunch bar whe re I'd bolte d the "Cone y Island Re d-Hots" on Monday, I de cided to let my reservation at the Hotel Windsor go by the board. I went into the lunch bar, sat down in an e nd booth, and kept my left hand over my black tie while I orde red soup, rolls and black coffee. I hope d that the othe r patrons would think I was a waiter on his way to work. While I was on my second cup of coffee , I took out my unmailed lette r to Siste r Irma and re read it. The substance of it seemed to me a trifle thin, and I de cided to hurry back to Les Amis and touch it up a bit. I also thought ove r my plans to visit Sister Irma, and wondered if it might not be a good idea to pick up my train reservations later that same evening. With those two thoughts in mind--ne ithe r of which really gave me the sort of lift I neede d--I left the lunch bar and walked rapidly back to school. Something extremely out of the way happened to me some fifteen minutes later. A statement, I'm aware , that has all the unpleasant earmarks of a build-up, but quite the contrary is true . I'm about to touch on an extraordinary expe rience , one that still strikes me as having been quite transcendent, and I'd like , if possible, to avoid seeming to pass it off as a case, or even a borderline case , of ge nuine mysticism. (To do othe rwise , I fee l, would be tantamount to implying or stating that the diffe rence in spiritual sorties be tween St. Francis and the ave rage, highstrung, Sunday le per-kisse r is only a vertical one .) In the nine o'clock twilight, as I approached the school building from across the street, there was a light on in the orthopedic appliances shop. I was startled to see a live pe rson in the shopcase, a hefty girl of about thirty, in a green, ye llow and lavende r chiffon dress. She was changing the truss on the wooden dummy. As I came up to the show window, she had evide ntly just taken off the old truss; it was unde r he r le ft arm (her right "profile" was toward me ), and she was lacing up the new one on the dummy. I stood watching her, fascinated, till suddenly she sensed, then saw, that she was be ing watched. I quickly smiled--to show her that this was a nonhostile figure in the tuxe do in the twilight on the other side of the glass--but it did no good. The girl's confusion was out of all normal proportion. She blushed, she dropped the remove d truss, she stepped back on a stack of irrigation basins--and her feet we nt out from under her. I reache d out to her instantly, hitting the tips of my fingers on the glass. She landed heavily on

[ 67 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger he r bottom, like a skater. She immediate ly got to he r feet without looking at me . He r face still flushe d, she pushe d her hair back with one hand, and resumed lacing up the truss on the dummy. It was just then that I had my Expe rience . Suddenly (and I say this, I believe , with all due self-consciousness), the sun came up and sped toward the bridge of my nose at the rate of ninety-three million miles a second. Blinded and ve ry frightened--I had to put my hand on the glass to kee p my balance. The thing laste d for no more than a few seconds. When I got my sight back, the girl had gone from the window, leaving be hind he r a shimmering fie ld of exquisite, twice -ble sse d, enamel flowers. I backed away from the window and walked around the block twice, till my knees stopped buckling. Then, without daring to venture anothe r look into the shop window, I we nt upstairs to my room and lay down on my bed. Some minutes, or hours later, I made, in French, the following brief entry in my diary: "I am giving Siste r Irma he r freedom to follow her own destiny. Everybody is a nun." (Tout le monde est une nonne. ) Be fore going to bed for the night, I wrote le tters to my four just-expelle d students, reinstating them. I said a mistake had been made in the administration department. Actually, the le tters seemed to write themselves. It may have had something to do with the fact that, before sitting down to write , I'd brought a chair up from downstairs. It seems altogether anticlimactic to mention it, but Le s Amis Des V ie ux Maitres close d down less than a week later, for being imprope rly licensed (for not be ing licensed at all, as a matter of fact). I packed up and joined Bobby, my ste pfather, in Rhode Island, whe re I spent the next six or e ight weeks, till art school reopened, inve stigating that most interesting of all summe r-active animals, the American Girl in Shorts. Right or wrong, I never again got in touch with Siste r Irma. Occasionally, I still hear from Bambi Kramer, though. The last I heard, she'd branched ove r into designing he r own Christmas cards. They'll be something to see , if she hasn't lost her touch.

[ 68 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger

Teddy
I'LL EXQUISITE DAY you, buddy, if you don't ge t down off that bag this minute. And I mean it," Mr. McArdle said. He was speaking from the inside twin be d--the be d farthe r away from the porthole. Viciously, with more of a whimpe r than a sigh, he foot-pushed his top sheet clear of his ankles, as though any kind of coverlet was suddenly too much for his sunburned, debilitated-looking body to bear. He was lying supine , in just the trouse rs of his pajamas, a lighte d cigarette in his right hand. His head was propped up just enough to re st uncomfortably, almost masochistically, against the very base of the headboard. His pillow and ashtray were both on the floor, between his and Mrs. McArdle 's bed. Without raising his body, he reached out a nude, inflame d-pink, right arm and flicked his ashes in the gene ral dire ction of the night table. "Octobe r, for God's sake," he said. "If this is Octobe r weather, gimme August." He turned his head to the right again, toward Teddy, looking for trouble. "C'mon," he said. "What the hell do you think I'm talking for? My health? Get down off there , please ." Teddy was standing on the broadside of a new looking cowhide Gladstone, the better to see out of his parents' open porthole . He was wearing extreme ly dirty, white ankle -sneake rs, no socks, seersucke r shorts that were both too long for him and at least a size too large in the seat, an ove rly laundered T shirt that had a hole the size of a dime in the right shoulde r, and an incongruously handsome , black alligator be lt. He needed a haircut-especially at the nape of the neck--the worst way, as only a small boy with an almost full-grown head and a reedlike ne ck can need one. "Teddy, did you hear me?" Te ddy was not leaning out of the porthole quite so far or so precariously as small boys are apt to lean out of open porthole s--both his feet, in fact, were flat on the surface of the Gladstone--but neither was he just conservative ly well-tipped; his face was considerably more outside than inside the cabin. Nonethe less, he was well within hearing of his father's voice--his fathe r's voice, that is, most singularly. Mr. McArdle played leading roles on no fewer than three daytime radio serials when he was in New York, and he had what might be calle d a third-class leading man's speaking voice : narcissistically dee p and resonant, functionally prepared at a moment's notice to outmale anyone in the same room with it, if ne cessary even a small boy. When it was on vacation from its profe ssional chores, it fell, as a rule, alte rnate ly in love with sheer volume and a theatrical brand of quie tness-steadine ss. Right now, volume was in order. "Teddy. God damn it--did you hear me?" Te ddy turned around at the waist, without changing the vigilant position of his feet on the Gladstone, and gave his fathe r a look of inquiry, whole and pure. His e yes, which we re pale brown in color, and not at all large , we re slightly crossed--the le ft eye more than the right. They were not crossed e nough to be disfiguring, or even to be necessarily noticeable at first glance . They we re crossed just enough to be mentioned, and only in context with the fact that one might have thought long and seriously before wishing them straighter, or deeper, or browner, or wide r set. His face, just as it was, carried the impact, howeve r oblique and slow-travelling, of real beauty. "I want you to ge t down off that bag, now. How many times do you want me to tell you?" Mr. McArdle said. "Stay exactly where you are, darling," said Mrs. McArdle, who evidently had a little trouble with he r sinuses early in the morning. Her e yes were open, but only just. "Don't move the tiniest part of an inch." She was lying on her right side, her face, on the pillow, turned left, toward Teddy and the porthole, her back to her husband. He r se cond sheet was drawn tight over he r ve ry probably nude body, enclosing her, arms and all, up to the chin. "Jump up and down," she said, and closed he r eyes. "Crush Daddy's bag." "That's a Jesus-brilliant thing to say," Mr. McArdle said quietly-steadily, addressing the back of his wife's head. "I pay twe nty-two pounds for a bag, and I ask the boy civilly not to stand on it, and you tell him to jump up and down on it. What's that supposed to be ? Funny?"

[ 69 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger "If that bag can't support a ten-year-old boy, who's thirteen pounds underweight for his age, I don't want it in my cabin," Mrs. McArdle said, without opening her eyes. "You know what I'd like to do?" Mr. McArdle said. "I'd like to kick your goddam head open." "Why don't you?" Mr. McArdle abruptly propped himse lf up on one elbow and squashe d out his cigare tte stub on the glass top of the night table. "One of these days--" he be gan grimly. "One of these days, you're going to have a tragic, tragic heart attack," Mrs. McArdle said, with a minimum of e nergy. Without bringing her arms into the open, she drew he r top sheet more tightly around and under her body. "The re 'll be a small, tasteful funeral, and eve rybody's going to ask who that attractive woman in the red dress is, sitting there in the first row, flirting with the organist and making a holy--" "You're so goddam funny it isn't e ven funny," Mr. McArdle said, lying ine rtly on his back again. During this little exchange, Te ddy had face d around and resumed looking out of the porthole . "We passed the Queen Mary at three-thirty-two this morning, going the other way, if anybody's interested," he said slowly. "Which I doubt." His voice was oddly and be autifully rough cut, as some small boys' voices are. Each of his phrasings was rather like a little ancient island, inundated by a miniature sea of whiskey. "That deck steward Boope r de spises had it on his blackboard." "I'll Queen Mary you, buddy, if you don't get off that bag this minute ," his father said. He turned his head toward Te ddy. "Get down from the re, now. Go get yourself a haircut or some thing." He looked at the back of his wife's head again. "He looks precocious, for God's sake." "I haven't any money," Teddy said. He placed his hands more secure ly on the sill of the porthole, and lowere d his chin onto the backs of his finge rs. "Mother. You know that man who sits right next to us in the dining room? Not the very thin one. The othe r one, at the same table . Right next to where our waiter puts his tray down." "Mm-hmm," Mrs. McArdle said. "Te ddy. Darling. Let Mother sleep just five minute s more, like a sweet boy." "Wait just a second. This is quite inte resting," Teddy said, without raising his chin from its resting place and without taking his eyes off the ocean. "He was in the gym a little while ago, while Sven was weighing me. He came up and started talking to me . He heard that last tape I made. Not the one in April. The one in May. He was at a party in Boston just before he went to Europe , and somebody at the party knew somebody in the Le idekker e xamining group--he didn't say who--and they borrowed that last tape I made and played it at the party. He seems ve ry interested in it. He's a friend of Professor Babcock's. Apparently he's a teache r himself. He said he was at Trinity College in Dublin, all summer." "Oh?" said Mrs. McArdle . "At a party they played it?" She lay gazing sleepily at the backs of Te ddy's le gs. "I guess so," Te ddy said. "He told Sven quite a bit about me , right while I was standing there. It was rather e mbarrassing." "Why should it be embarrassing?" Te ddy hesitated. "I said `rathe r' embarrassing. I qualifie d it." "I'll qualify you, buddy, if you don't get the hell off that bag," Mr. McArdle said. He had just lit a fre sh cigare tte. "I'm going to count three. One, God damn it ... Two.. ." "What time is it?" Mrs. McArdle suddenly aske d the backs of Teddy's legs. "Don't you and Booper have a swimming le sson at ten-thirty?" "We have time," Te ddy said. "--Vloom!" He suddenly thrust his whole head out of the porthole , ke pt it there a few seconds, then brought it in just long enough to report, "Someone just dumped a whole garbage can of orange peels out the window." "Out the window. Out the window," Mr. McArdle said sarcastically, flicking his ashes. "Out the porthole , buddy, out the porthole." He glance d ove r at his wife. "Call Boston. Quick, get the Le idekker e xamining group on the phone ." "Oh, you're such a brilliant wit," Mrs. McArdle said. "Why do you try?"

[ 70 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Te ddy took in most of his head. "They float very nice ly," he said without turning around. "That's interesting." "Teddy. For the last time . I'm going to count three, and then I'm-" "I don't mean it's interesting that they float," Teddy said. "It's interesting that I know about them being there. If I hadn't seen them, then I wouldn't know they we re there, and if I didn't know they were the re, I wouldn't be able to say that they e ven exist. That's a very nice , pe rfect example of the way--" "Teddy," Mrs. McArdle interrupted, without visibly stirring under her top sheet. "Go find Booper for me. Whe re is she? I don't want her lolling around in that sun again today, with that bum." "She's adequately cove re d. I made he r wear he r dungaree s," Teddy said. "Some of them are starting to sink now. In a fe w minute s, the only place they'll still be floating will be inside my mind. That's quite interesting, because if you look at it a certain way, that's where they started floating in the first place. If I'd never been standing he re at all, or if some body'd come along and sort of chopped my head off right while I was--" "Where is she now?" Mrs. McArdle aske d. "Look at Mother a minute, Teddy." Te ddy turned and looked at his mother. "What?" he said. "Where's Boope r now? I don't want her meandering all around the deck chairs again, bothering people. If that awful man--" "She's all right. I gave he r the came ra." Mr. McArdle lurched up on one arm. "You gave he r the cameral" he said. "What the he ll's the idea? My goddam Le ica! I'm not going to have a six-year-old child gallivanting all ove r--" "I showed her how to hold it so she won't drop it," Teddy said. "And I took the film out, naturally." "I want that camera, Teddy. You hear me? I want you to get down off that bag this minute, and I want that came ra back in this room in five minutes--or there's going to be one little ge nius among the missing. Is that cle ar?" Te ddy turned his feet around on the Gladstone, and ste pped down. He bent ove r and tie d the lace of his le ft sneake r while his father, still raised up on one elbow, watched him like a monitor. "Tell Boope r I want her," Mrs. McArdle said. "And give Mother a kiss." Finished tying his sneaker lace, Teddy pe rfunctorily gave his mother a kiss on the cheek. She in turn brought he r le ft arm out from under the sheet, as if bent on encircling Teddy's waist with it, but by the time she had got it out from under, Te ddy had moved on. He had come around the othe r side and entered the space between the two beds. He stooped, and stood up with his father's pillow unde r his left arm and the glass ashtray that be longe d on the night table in his right hand. Switching the ashtray over to his left hand, he went up to the night table and, with the edge of his right hand, swept his fathe r's cigarette stubs and ashes into the ashtray. Then, be fore putting the ashtray back where it be longe d, he used the under side of his forearm to wipe off the filmy wake of ashes from the glass top of the table. He wipe d off his forearm on his seersucke r shorts. The n he placed the ashtray on the glass top, with a world of care, as if he believe d an ashtray should be dead-cente red on the surface of a night table or not placed at all. At that point, his father, who had been watching him, abruptly gave up watching him. "Don't you want your pillow?" Teddy asked him. "I want that camera, young man." "You can't be very comfortable in that position. It isn't possible," Teddy said. "I'll leave it right he re ." He placed the pillow on the foot of the bed, clear of his fathe r's fee t. He started out of the cabin. "Teddy," his mothe r said, without turning over. "Tell Booper I want to see he r before he r swimming lesson." "Why don't you leave the kid alone?" Mr. McArdle asked. "You seem to resent her having a few lousy minute s' freedom. You know how you treat he r? I'll te ll you exactly how you treat he r. You treat her like a bloomin' criminal." "Bloomin'! Oh, that's cute! You're getting so English, lover."

[ 71 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Te ddy linge red for a moment at the door, reflective ly e xpe rimenting with the door handle, turning it slowly left and right. "After I go out this door, I may only exist in the minds of all my acquaintances," he said. "I may be an orange peel." "What, darling?" Mrs. McArdle aske d from across the cabin, still lying on he r right side . "Let's get on the ball, buddy. Let's get that Leica down here." "Come give Mother a kiss. A nice, big one ." "Not right now," Te ddy said absently. "I'm tired." He closed the door behind him. The ship's daily newspape r lay just outside the doorsill. It was a single sheet of glossy paper, with printing on just one side. Teddy picked it up and began to read it as he started slowly aft down the long passageway. From the opposite end, a huge , blond woman in a starched white uniform was coming toward him, carrying a vase of longstemme d, red roses. As she passed Teddy, she put out he r left hand and grazed the top of his head with it, saying, "Some body needs a haircut!" Teddy passive ly looke d up from his ne wspape r, but the woman had passed, and he didn't look back. He went on reading. At the end of the passageway, before an enormous mural of Saint George and the Dragon ove r the staircase landing, he folded the ship's newspape r into quarte rs and put it into his left hip pocket. He then climbed the broad, shallow, carpe ted steps up to Main Deck, one flight up. He took two ste ps at a time, but slowly, holding on to the banister, putting his whole body into it, as if the act of climbing a flight of stairs was for him, as it is for many children, a moderate ly pleasurable end in itself. At the Main De ck landing, he went directly over to the Purser's desk, where a good-looking girl in naval uniform was presiding at the mome nt. She was stapling some mimeographed sheets of paper togethe r. "Can you te ll me what time that game starts today, please?" Te ddy asked he r. "I beg your pardon?" "Can you te ll me what time that game starts today?" The girl gave him a lipsticky smile. "What game, honey?" she asked. "You know. That word game the y had yesterday and the day be fore , whe re you're supposed to supply the missing words. It's mostly that you have to put e verything in context." The girl held off fitting three sheets of pape r be tween the planes of her stapler. "Oh," she said. "Not till late afternoon, I believe . I belie ve it's around four o'clock. Isn't that a little over your head, dear?" "No, it isn't ... Thank you," Teddy said, and started to leave. "Wait a minute , honey! What's your name?" "Theodore McArdle ," Teddy said. "What's yours?" "My name?" said the girl, smiling. "My name's Ensign Mathewson." Te ddy watched her pre ss down on he r staple r. "I knew you were an ensign," he said. "I'm not sure, but I belie ve when somebody asks your name you're supposed to say your whole name. Jane Mathewson, or Phyllis Mathewson, or whateve r the case may be." "Oh, really?" "As I say, I think so," Teddy said. "I'm not sure , though. It may be diffe rent if you're in uniform. Anyway, thank you for the information. Goodbye!" He turned and took the stairs up to the Promenade Deck, again two at a time, but this time as if in rather a hurry. He found Booper, after some exte nsive looking, high up on the Sports Deck. She was in a sunny clearing--a glade , almost--between two deck-te nnis courts that were not in use. In a squatting position, with the sun at her back and a light breeze riffling her silky, blond hair, she was busily piling twelve or fourteen shuffleboard discs into two tangent stacks, one for the black discs, one for the red. A very small boy, in a cotton sun suit, was standing close by, on her right, pure ly in an obse rver's capacity. "Look!" Boope r said commandingly to her brothe r as he approached. She sprawled forward and surrounded the two stacks of shuffleboard discs with her arms to show off her accomplishment, to isolate it from whateve r else was aboard ship. "Myron," she said hostilely, addre ssing her companion, "you're making it all shadowy, so my brothe r can't

[ 72 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger see. Move your carcass." She shut he r eyes and waited, with a cross-bearing grimace, till Myron move d. Te ddy stood over the two stacks of discs and looke d down appraisingly at them. "That's ve ry nice," he said. "Ve ry symmetrical." "This guy," Booper said, indicating Myron, "never even heard of backgammon. They don't even have one." Te ddy glance d brie fly, objectively, at Myron. "L iste n," he said to Booper. "Where 's the camera? Daddy wants it right away." "He doe sn't e ven live in New York," Booper informed Teddy. "And his fathe r's dead. He was killed in Korea." She turned to Myron. "Wasn't he ?" she demanded, but without waiting for a response. "Now if his mothe r dies, he'll be an orphan. He didn't even know that." She looked at Myron. "Did you?" Myron, non-committal, folded his arms. "You're the stupidest person I eve r met," Booper said to him. "You're the stupidest pe rson in this ocean. Did you know that?" "He is not," Teddy said. "You are not, Myron." He addressed his siste r: "Give me your attention a second. Whe re 's the came ra? I have to have it imme diately. Whe re is it?" "Over the re ," Booper said, indicating no direction at all. She drew he r two stacks of shuffleboard discs in close r to her. "All I need now is two giants," she said. "The y could play backgammon till they got all tire d and the n the y could climb up on that smokestack and throw these at everybody and kill them." She looked at Myron. "They could kill your parents," she said to him knowledgeably. "And if that didn't kill them, you know what you could do? You could put some poison on some marshmellows and make them eat it." The Leica was about ten fee t away, next to the white railing that surrounded the Sports Deck. It lay in the drain gully, on its side. Teddy went ove r and picked it up by its strap and hung it around his ne ck. Then, immediate ly, he took it off. He took it over to Booper. "Booper, do me a favor. You take it down, please ," he said. "It's ten o'clock. I have to write in my diary." "I'm busy." "Mother wants to see you right away, anyway," Teddy said. "You're a liar." "I'm not a liar. She doe s," Te ddy said. "So please take this down with you when you go . . . C'mon, Booper." "What's she want to see me for?" Boope r demande d. "I don't want to see her." She suddenly struck Myron's hand, which was in the act of picking off the top shuffleboard disc from the red stack. "Hands off," she said. Te ddy hung the strap attached to the Leica around he r neck. "I'm se rious, now. Take this down to Daddy right away, and then I'll see you at the pool later on," he said. "I'll meet you right at the pool at ten-thirty. Or right outside that place where you change your clothes. Be on time , now. It's way down on E Deck, don't forget, so leave yourself plenty of time ." He turne d, and left. "I hate you! I hate everybody in this ocean!" Boope r called after him. Be low the Sports Deck, on the broad, after e nd of the Sun De ck, uncompromisingly alfre sco, we re some seventy-five or more deck chairs, se t up and aligned seven or eight rows deep, with aisle s just wide enough for the deck steward to use without unavoidably tripping ove r the sunning passenge rs' paraphe rnalia knitting bags, dustjacketed nove ls, bottles of sun-tan lotion, cameras. The area was crowded when Teddy arrived. He starte d at the rearmost row and moved me thodically, from row to row, stopping at each chair, whether or not it was occupied, to read the name placard on its arm. Only one or two of the reclining passenge rs spoke to him--that is, made any of the commonplace pleasantries adults are some times prone to make to a te n-year-old boy who is single-mindedly looking for the chair that belongs to him. His youngness and single -mindedness were obvious e nough, but pe rhaps his general demeanor altogether lacked, or had too little of, that sort of cute solemnity that many adults readily speak up, or down, to. His clothes may have had some thing to do with it, too. The hole in the

[ 73 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger shoulde r of his T shirt was not a cute hole. The exce ss material in the seat of his seersucke r shorts, the excess length of the shorts themse lves, we re not cute excesses. The McArdles' four deck chairs, cushioned and ready for occupancy, were situate d in the middle of the second row from the front. Teddy sat down in one of them so that-whether or not it was his intention--no one was sitting directly on either side of him. He stretche d out his bare, unsuntanne d le gs, feet togethe r, on the le g re st, and, almost simultaneously, took a small, te n-cent notebook out of his right hip pocke t. Then, with instantly one-pointed concentration, as if only he and the notebook existed--no sunshine, no fe llow passengers, no ship--,he began to turn the pages. With the exce ption of a very few pencil notations, the entrie s in the notebook had apparently all been made with a ball-point pen. The handwriting itse lf was manuscript style, such as is currently being taught in Ame rican schools, instead of the old, Palmer method. It was le gible without being pretty-pre tty. The flow was what was remarkable about the handwriting. In no sense--no me chanical se nse , at any rate--did the words and sente nce s look as though they had been written by a child. Te ddy gave considerable reading time to what looked like his most re cent entry. It cove red a little more than three pages: Diary for October 27, 1952 Property of Theodore McArdle 412 A Deck Appropriate and pleasant reward if finder promptly re turns to Theodore McArdle. See if you can find daddy's army dog tags and wear them whenever possible . It won't kill you and he will like it. Answer Professor Mande ll's le tter when you ge t a chance and the patience . Ask him not to send me any more poetry books. I alre ady have enough for 1 year anyway. I am quite sick of it anyway. A man walks along the beach and unfortunately gets hit in the head by a cocoanut. His head unfortunately cracks open in two halves. Then his wife comes along the beach singing a song and sees the 2 halve s and recognizes them and picks them up. She gets ve ry sad of course and cries heart breakingly. That is exactly where I am tired of poe try. Supposing the lady just picks up the 2 halves and shouts into them ve ry angrily "Stop that!" Do not mention this when you answer his letter, however. It is quite controversial and Mrs. Mande ll is a poe t besides. Ge t Sven's addre ss in Elizabeth, New Jersey. It would be inte resting to meet his wife, also his dog L indy. However, I would not like to own a dog myself. Write condole nce letter to Dr. Wokawara about his ne phritis. Get his new addre ss from mothe r. Try the sports deck for me ditation tomorrow morning before breakfast but do not lose consciousness. Also do not lose consciousness in the dining room if that waiter drops that big spoon again. Daddy was quite furious. Words and expre ssions to look up in library tomorrow when you re turn the books-Ne phritis myriad gift horse cunning triumvirate Be nicer to librarian. Discuss some general things with him when he gets kittenish.

[ 74 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Te ddy abruptly took out a small, bullet-shaped, ballpoint pen from the side pocke t of his shorts, uncapped it, and began to write . He used his right thigh as a desk, instead of the chair arm. Diary for October 28, 1952 Same address and re ward as writte n on October 26 and 27, 1952. I wrote lette rs to the following persons afte r meditation this morning. Dr. Wokawara Professor Mandell Professor Pee t Burgess Hake, Jr. Roberta Hake Sanford Hake Grandma Hake Mr. Graham Professor Walton I could have aske d mother where daddy's dog tags are but she would probably say I don't have to wear them. I know he has them with him be cause I saw him pack them. Life is a gift horse in my opinion. I think it is very tasteless of Professor Walton to criticize my pare nts. He wants people to be a certain way. It will either happen today or February 14, 1955 when I am sixteen. It is ridiculous to mention e ven. Afte r making this last entry, Teddy continued to keep his atte ntion on the page and his ball-point pen poised, as though there were more to come . He apparently was unaware that he had a lone interested observer. About fifteen feet forwardship from the first row of de ck chairs, and eighteen or twenty rather sunblinding feet overhead, a young man was steadily watching him from the Sports Deck railing. This had been going on for some ten minutes. It was evident that the young man was now reaching some sort of decision, for he abruptly took his foot down from the railing. He stood for a moment, still looking in Teddy's direction, then walke d away, out of sight. Not a minute late r, though, he turned up, obtrusively ve rtical, among the de ck-chair ranks. He was about thirty, or younger. He directly started to make his way down-aisle toward Teddy's chair, casting distracting little shadows ove r the pages of pe ople 's nove ls and stepping rather uninhibite dly (considering that his was the only standing, moving figure in sight) over knitting bags and other personal e ffects. Te ddy seemed oblivious of the fact that someone was standing at the foot of his chair-or, for that matter, casting a shadow ove r his notebook. A few people in the row or two be hind him, however, were more distractible . They looked up at the young man as, pe rhaps, only people in deck chairs can look up at someone. The young man had a kind of poise about him, though, that looked as though it might hold up indefinitely, with the ve ry small proviso that he keep at least one hand in one pocket. "Hello, there!" he said to Teddy. Te ddy looked up. "Hello," he said. He partly closed his notebook, partly let it close by itself. "Mind if I sit down a minute ?" the young man asked, with what seemed to be unlimited cordiality. "This anybody's chair?" "We ll, the se four chairs be long to my family," Teddy said. "But my parents aren't up ye t." "Not up? On a day like this," the young man said. He had already lowe re d himself into the chair at Teddy's right. The chairs were placed so close together that the arms

[ 75 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger touched. "That's sacrilege," he said. "Absolute sacrilege." He stretche d out his le gs, which were unusually heavy at the thighs, almost like human bodies in themse lves. He was dre ssed, for the most part, in Eastern seaboard regimentals: a turf haircut on top, run-down brogues on the bottom, with a somewhat mixed uniform in be tween--buffcolore d woole n socks, charcoal-gray trouse rs, a button-down-collar shirt, no ne cktie, and a herringbone jacke t that looked as though it had been properly age d in some of the more popular postgraduate seminars at Yale , or Harvard, or Prince ton. "Oh, God, what a divine day," he said appreciatively, squinting up at the sun. "I'm an absolute pawn when it comes to the weather." He crossed his heavy legs, at the ankle s. "As a matte r of fact, I've been known to take a pe rfectly normal rainy day as a personal insult. So this is absolute manna to me." Though his speaking voice was, in the usual connotation, well bre d, it carried conside rably more than adequate ly, as though he had some sort of understanding with himse lf that anything he had to say would sound pretty much all right--inte lligent, literate, even amusing or stimulating--either from Te ddy's vantage point or from that of the people in the row be hind, if the y were liste ning. He looked obliquely down at Te ddy, and smile d. "How are you and the weather?" he asked. His smile was not unpersonable, but it was social, or conversational, and related back, howeve r indire ctly, to his own ego. "The weather ever bother you out of all sensible proportion?" he asked, smiling. "I don't take it too pe rsonal, if that's what you mean," Teddy said. The young man laughed, letting his head go back. "Wonderful," he said. "My name, incidentally, is Bob Nicholson. I don't know if we quite got around to that in the gym. I know your name, of course." Te ddy shifted his we ight ove r to one hip and stashed his notebook in the side pocket of his shorts. "I was watching you write--from way up there," Nicholson said, narrative ly, pointing. "Good Lord. You were working away like a little Trojan." Te ddy looked at him. "I was writing something in my note book." Nicholson nodded, smiling. "How was Europe?" he aske d conve rsationally. "Did you enjoy it?" "Yes, ve ry much, thank you." "Where all did you go?" Te ddy suddenly reached forward and scratche d the calf of his leg. "We ll, it would take me too much time to name all the places, because we took our car and drove fairly great distances." He sat back. "My mothe r and I were mostly in Edinburgh, Scotland, and Oxford, England, though. I think I told you in the gym I had to be interviewe d at both those places. Mostly the University of Edinburgh." "No, I don't believe you did," Nicholson said. "I was wonde ring if you'd done anything like that. How'd it go? They grill you?" "I beg your pardon?" Teddy said. "How'd it go? Was it inte resting?" "At time s, yes. At times, no," Te ddy said. "We stayed a little bit too long. My father wanted to get back to New York a little soone r than this ship. But some people we re coming over from Stockholm, Swe den, and Innsbruck, Austria, to meet me, and we had to wait around." "It's always that way." Te ddy looked at him directly for the first time. "Are you a poet?" he aske d. "A poe t?" Nicholson said. "Lord, no. Alas, no. Why do you ask?" "I don't know. Poets are always taking the weather so personally. They're always sticking the ir emotions in things that have no emotions." Nicholson, smiling, reached into his jacket pocket and took out cigarettes and matches. "I rathe r thought that was their stock in trade ," he said. "Are n't emotions what poets are primarily concerned with?" Te ddy apparently didn't hear him, or wasn't listening. He was looking abstractedly toward, or over, the twin smoke stacks up on the Sports Deck.

[ 76 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Nicholson got his cigarette lit, with some difficulty, for the re was a light breeze blowing from the north. He sat back, and said, "I understand you left a pretty disturbed bunch--" " `Nothing in the voice of the cicada intimate s how soon it will die,' " Teddy said suddenly. "'Along this road goes no one , this autumn eve."' "What was that?" Nicholson asked, smiling. "Say that again." "Those are two Japane se poems. They're not full of a lot of emotional stuff," Teddy said. He sat forward abruptly, tilted his head to the right, and gave his right ear a light clap with his hand. "I still have some water in my ear from my swimming lesson ye sterday," he said. He gave his ear anothe r couple of claps, then sat back, putting his arms up on both armrests. It was, of course, a normal, adult-size deck chair, and he looked distinctly small in it, but at the same time, he looked pe rfectly relaxe d, e ven se re ne. "I understand you le ft a pretty disturbe d bunch of pedants up at Boston," Nicholson said, watching him. "After that last little se t-to. The whole Leidekker examining group, more or le ss, the way I unde rstand it. I believe I told you I had rather a long chat with Al Babcock last J une . Same night, as, a matte r of fact, I heard your tape played off." "Yes, you did. You told me ." "I understand they were a pre tty disturbed bunch," Nicholson pressed. "From What Al told me, you all had quite a little lethal bull session late one night--the same night you made that tape , I believe ." He took a drag on his cigarette . "From what I gathe r, you made some little predictions that disturbed the boys no end. Is that right?" "I wish I knew why people think it's so important to be emotional," Teddy said. "My mothe r and fathe r don't think a person's human unle ss he thinks a lot of things are ve ry sad or ve ry annoying or very-very unjust, sort of. My fathe r ge ts very emotional even when he reads the newspaper. He thinks I'm inhuman." Nicholson flicked his cigarette ash off to one side. "I take it you have no emotions?" he said. Te ddy reflected before answering. "If I do, I don't remember when I eve r used them," he said. "I don't see what they're good for." "You love God, don't you?" Nicholson asked, with a little excess of quie tness. "Isn't that your forte, so to speak? From what I heard on that tape and from what Al Babcock-" "Yes, sure , I love Him. But I don't love Him sentimentally. He never said anybody had to love Him sentimentally," Te ddy said. "If I we re God, I ce rtainly wouldn't want people to love me sentimentally. It's too unre liable ." "You love your parents, don't you?" "Yes, I do--ve ry much," Teddy said, "but you want to make me use that word to mean what you want it to mean--I can tell." "All right. In what sense do you want to use it?" Te ddy thought it ove r. "You know what the word `affinity' means?" he asked, turning to Nicholson. "I have a rough ide a," Nicholson said dryly. "I have a ve ry strong affinity for them. They're my parents, I mean, and we 're all part of each other's harmony and e verything," Teddy said. "I want them to have a nice time while they're alive, because they like having a nice time . . . But they don't love me and Boope r--that's my sister--that way. I mean they don't seem able to love us just the way we are. They don't seem able to love us unless they can keep changing us a little bit. They love the ir re asons for loving us almost as much as they love us, and most of the time more . It's not so good, that way." He turned toward Nicholson again, sitting slightly forward. "Do you have the time, please?" he aske d. "I have a swimming lesson at tenthirty." "You have time ," Nicholson said without first looking at his wrist watch. He pushed back his cuff. "It's just ten after te n," he said. "Thank you," Teddy said, and sat back. "We can enjoy our conversation for about ten more minutes." Nicholson le t one le g drop over the side of the deck chair, leaned

[ 77 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger forward, and stepped on his cigarette end. "As I understand it," he said, sitting back, "you hold pretty firmly to the Vedantic theory of re incarnation." "It isn't a theory, it's as much a part--" "All right," Nicholson said quickly. He smiled, and gently raised the flats of his hands, in a sort of ironic bene diction. "We won't argue that point, for the moment. Let me finish." He crosse d his heavy, outstre tched le gs again. "From what I gather, you've acquired ce rtain information, through meditation, that's given you some conviction that in your last incarnation you were a holy man in India, but more or le ss fell from Grace-" "I wasn't a holy man," Teddy said. "I was just a person making ve ry nice spiritual advancement." "All right--whateve r it was," Nicholson said. "But the point is you feel that in your last incarnation you more or less fell from Grace before final Illumination. Is that right, or am I--" "That's right," Teddy said. "I met a lady, and I sort of stoppe d me ditating." He took his arms down from the armrests, and tucked his hands, as if to keep them warm, under his thighs. "I would have had to take another body and come back to earth again anyway-I mean I wasn't so spiritually advanced that I could have die d, if I hadn't met that lady, and then gone straight to Brahma and ne ve r again have to come back to earth. But I wouldn't have had to get incarnated in an American body if I hadn't me t that lady. I mean it's very hard to meditate and live a spiritual life in America. People think you're a freak if you try to. My father thinks I'm a freak, in a way. And my mothe r--we ll, she doesn't think it's good for me to think about God all the time. She thinks it's bad for my health." Nicholson was looking at him, studying him. "I belie ve you said on that last tape that you were six when you first had a mystical experience . Is that right?" "I was six when I saw that eve rything was God, and my hair stood up, and all that," Te ddy said. "It was on a Sunday, I remember. My sister was only a very tiny child then, and she was drinking he r milk, and all of a sudden I saw that she was God and the milk was God. I mean, all she was doing was pouring God into God, if you know what I mean." Nicholson didn't say anything. "But I could get out of the finite dimensions fairly often when I was four," Te ddy said, as an afte rthought. "Not continuously or anything, but fairly often." Nicholson nodded. "You did?" he said. "You could?" "Yes," Teddy said. "That was on the tape . . . Or maybe it was on the one I made last April. I'm not sure." Nicholson took out his cigarettes again, but without taking his eyes off Teddy. "How does one ge t out of the finite dimensions?" he asked, and gave a short laugh. "I mean, to be gin ve ry basically, a block of wood is a block of wood, for example. It has length, width--" "It hasn't. That's where you're wrong," Te ddy said. "Everybody just thinks things keep stopping off somewhere. They don't. That's what I was trying to tell Profe ssor Peet." He shifted in his seat and took out an eyesore of a handkerchief--a gray, wadde d entity-and blew his nose. "The reason things seem to stop off somewhere is because that's the only way most people know how to look at things," he said. "But that doesn't mean they do." He put away his handkerchie f, and looked at Nicholson. "Would you hold up your arm a second, please?" he asked. "My arm? Why?" "Just do it. Just do it a second." Nicholson raised his forearm an inch or two above the level of the armre st. "This one?" he aske d. Te ddy nodded. "What do you call that?" he asked. "What do you mean? It's my arm. It's an arm." "How do you know it is?" Teddy asked. "You know it's called an arm, but how do you know it is one? Do you have any proof that it's an arm?" Nicholson took a cigarette out of his pack, and lit it. "I think that smacks of the worst kind of sophistry, frankly," he said, exhaling smoke. "It's an arm, for heaven's sake,

[ 78 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger be cause it's an arm. In the first place , it has to have a name to distinguish it from othe r obje cts. I mean you can't simply--" "You're just being logical," Teddy said to him impassively. "I'm just be ing what?" Nicholson asked, with a little excess of politeness. "Logical. You're just giving me a regular, inte lligent answe r," Te ddy said. "I was trying to help you. You asked me how I ge t out of the finite dimensions when I feel like it. I ce rtainly don't use logic when I do it. Logic's the first thing you have to get rid of." Nicholson removed a flake of tobacco from his tongue with his fingers. "You know Adam?" Teddy asked him. "Do I know who?" "Adam. In the Bible." Nicholson smiled. "Not personally," he said dryly. Te ddy hesitated. "Don't be angry with me ," he said. "You asked me a question, and I'm--" "I'm not angry with you, for heaven's sake." "Okay," Teddy said. He was sitting back in his chair, but his head was turned toward Nicholson. "You know that apple Adam ate in the Garde n of Eden, re fe rred to in the Bible?" he aske d. "You know what was in that apple? Logic. L ogic and inte llectual stuff. That was all that was in it. So--this is my point--what you have to do is vomit it up if you want to see things as they really are. I mean if you vomit it up, the n you won't have any more trouble with blocks of wood and stuff. You won't see everything stopping off all the time . And you'll know what your arm really is, if you're interested. Do you know what I mean? Do you follow me?" "I follow you," Nicholson said, rathe r shortly. "The trouble is," Te ddy said, "most pe ople don't want to see things the way they are . They don't even want to stop getting born and dying all the time. They just want new bodies all the time, instead of stopping and staying with God, where it's really nice." He refle cted. "I never saw such a bunch of apple -eaters," he said. He shook his head. At that moment, a white -coated deck steward, who was making his rounds within the area, stopped in front of Teddy and Nicholson and asked them if they would care to have morning broth. Nicholson didn't respond to the question at all. Teddy said, "No, thank you," and the deck steward passed them by. "If you'd rather not discuss this, you don't have to," Nicholson said abruptly, and rather brusque ly. He flicked his cigarette ash. "But is it true, or isn't it, that you informe d the whole Leidekker examining bunch--Walton, Pee t, Larsen, Samue ls, and that bunch--whe n and where and how they would e ventually die? Is that true , or isn't it? You don't have to discuss it if you don't want to, but the way the rumor around Boston--" "No, it is not true ," Teddy said with emphasis. "I told them places, and times, when they should be very, ve ry care ful. And I told them ce rtain things it might be a good idea for them to do . . . But I didn't say anything like that. I didn't say anything was inevitable , that way." He took out his handkerchief again and used it. Nicholson waited, watching him. "And I didn't te ll Professor Peet anything like that at all. Firstly, he wasn't one of the ones who we re kidding around and asking me a bunch of questions. I mean all I told Professor Peet was that he shouldn't be a teache r any more after January--that's all I told him." Te ddy, sitting back, was silent a moment. "All those othe r professors, they practically forced me to te ll them all that stuff. It was afte r we we re all finished with the interview and making that tape, and it was quite late, and they all kept sitting around smoking cigare ttes and ge tting ve ry kittenish." "But you didn't tell Walton, or Larsen, for e xample , when or where or how death would e ventually come?" Nicholson pre ssed. "No. I did not," Teddy said firmly. "I wouldn't have told them any of that stuff, but they kept talking about it. Professor Walton sort of started it. He said he really wished he knew when he was going to die, be cause then he'd know what work he should do and what work he shouldn't do, and how to use his time to his best advantage, and all like that. And then they all said that . . . So I told them a little bit."

[ 79 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger Nicholson didn't say anything. "I didn't tell them when they we re actually going to die, though. That's a very false rumor," Teddy said. "I could have, but I knew that in their hearts they really didn't want to know. I mean I knew that e ven though they teach Religion and Philosophy and all, they're still pretty afraid to die ." Teddy sat, or reclined, in sile nce for a minute . "It's so silly," he said. "All you do is get the heck out of your body when you die. My gosh, everybody's done it thousands and thousands of times. Just be cause they don't remember it doesn't mean they haven't done it. It's so silly." "That may be . That may be," Nicholson said. "But the logical fact remains that no matte r how intelligently--" "It's so silly," Teddy said again. "For e xample , I have a swimming lesson in about five minutes. I could go downstairs to the pool, and there might not be any wate r in it. This might be the day they change the water or some thing. What might happen, though, I might walk up to the e dge of it, just to have a look at the bottom, for instance, and my siste r might come up and sort of push me in. I could fracture my skull and die instantaneously." Teddy looke d at Nicholson. "That could happen," he said. "My siste r's only six, and she hasn't been a human being for very many lives, and she doe sn't like me ve ry much. That could happen, all right. What would be so tragic about it, though? What's there to be afraid of, I mean? I'd just be doing what I was supposed to do, that's all, wouldn't I?" Nicholson snorted mildly. "It might not be a tragedy from your point of view, but it would certainly be a sad eve nt for your mother and dad," he said "Ever consider that?" "Yes, of course, I have," Teddy said. "But that's only because they have names and emotions for everything that happens." He had been keeping his hands tucked under his legs again. He took them out now, put his arms up on the armrests, and looked at Nicholson. "You know Sven? The man that takes care of the gym?" he asked. He waited till he got a nod from Nicholson. "Well, if Sven dreame d tonight that his dog died, he'd have a very, very bad night's sleep, because he 's very fond of that dog. But when he woke up in the morning, e ve rything would be all right. He 'd know it was only a dream." Nicholson nodded. "What's the point, exactly?" "The point is if his dog really died, it would be exactly the same thing. Only, he wouldn't know it. I mean he wouldn't wake up till he die d himself." Nicholson, looking de tached, was using his right hand to give himself a slow, sensuous massage at the back of the neck. His left hand, motionless on the armrest, with a fresh, unlighted cigare tte be tween the fingers, looked oddly white and inorganic in the brilliant sunlight. Te ddy suddenly got up. "I really have to go now, I'm afraid," he said. He sat down, tentatively, on the extended leg attachment of his chair, facing Nicholson, and tucked in his T shirt. "I have about one and a half minutes, I guess, to get to my swimming lesson," he said. "It's all the way down on E Deck." "May I ask why you told Profe ssor Peet he should stop teaching after the first of the year?" Nicholson asked, rathe r bluntly. "I know Bob Peet. That's why I ask." Te ddy tightened his alligator be lt. "Only be cause he's quite spiritual, and he 's teaching a lot of stuff right now that isn't very good for him if he wants to make any real spiritual advancement. It stimulates him too much. It's time for him to take eve rything out of his head, instead of putting more stuff in. He could get rid of a lot of the apple in just this one life if he wanted to. He 's very good at meditating." Teddy got up. "I better go now. I don't want to be too late." Nicholson looked up at him, and sustained the look--de taining him. "What would you do if you could change the educational system?" he asked ambiguously. "Ever think about that at all?" "I really have to go," Te ddy said. "Just answer that one question," Nicholson said. "Education's my baby, actually-that's what I teach. That's why I ask." "We ll . . . I'm not too sure what I'd do," Teddy said. "I know I'm pretty sure I wouldn't start with the things schools usually start with." He folded his arms, and refle cted briefly. "I think I'd first just assemble all the children toge ther and show them how to meditate. I'd try to show them how to find out who they are , not just what the ir names

[ 80 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger are and things like that . . . I guess, e ven before that, I'd get them to empty out everything their pare nts and e verybody eve r told them. I mean even if their pare nts just told them an elephant's big, I'd make them empty that out. An elephant's only big when it's next to something else--a dog or a lady, for example." Te ddy thought anothe r moment. "I wouldn't even te ll them an elephant has a trunk. I might show them an ele phant, if I had one handy, but I'd let them just walk up to the elephant not knowing anything more about it than the e le phant knew about them. The same thing with grass, and other things. I wouldn't even te ll them grass is gree n. Colors are only names. I mean if you tell them the grass is green, it make s them start expecting the grass to look a ce rtain way--your way--instead of some othe r way that may be just as good, and may be much be tter . . . I don't know. I'd just make them vomit up e very bit of the apple their pare nts and e verybody made them take a bite out of." "There's no risk you'd be raising a little gene ration of ignoramuses?" "Why? They wouldn't any more be ignoramuse s than an e le phant is. Or a bird is. Or a tree is," Teddy said. "Just because something is a ce rtain way, instead of just behaves a ce rtain way, doesn't mean it's an ignoramus." "No?" "No!" Te ddy said. "Besides, if they wanted to learn all that other stuff--names and colors and things--they could do it, if the y felt like it, later on when they were older. But I'd want them to be gin with all the real ways of looking at things, not just the way all the othe r apple -eaters look at things--that's what I mean." He came closer to Nicholson, and extended his hand down to him. "I have to go now. Honestly. I've enjoyed--" "Just one second-sit down a minute," Nicholson said. "Ever think you might like to do something in re search when you grow up? Medical research, or something of that kind? It seems to me, with your mind, you might eventually--" Te ddy answered, but without sitting down. "I thought about that once, a couple of years ago," he said. "I've talked to quite a few doctors." He shook his head. "That wouldn't interest me very much. Doctors stay too right on the surface. They're always talking about cells and things." "Oh? You don't attach any importance to cell structure?" "Yes, sure , I do. But doctors talk about cells as if they had such unlimited importance all by themse lves. As if the y didn't really be long to the person that has them." Teddy brushed back his hair from his fore head with one hand. "I grew my own body," he said. "Nobody e lse did it for me. So if I grew it, I must have known how to grow it. Unconsciously, at least. I may have lost the conscious knowledge of how to grow it sometime in the last fe w hundred thousand years, but the knowledge is still the re , be cause --obviously--I've use d it. . . . It would take quite a lot of meditation and emptying out to get the whole thing back--I mean the conscious knowledge--but you could do it if you wanted to. If you opened up wide enough." He suddenly reached down and picked up Nicholson's right hand from the armrest. He shook it just once , cordially, and said, "Goodbye. I have to go." And this time, Nicholson wasn't able to de tain him, he started so quickly to make his way through the aisle. Nicholson sat motionle ss for some few minutes after he le ft, his hands on the armrests of the chair, his unlighted cigarette still be tween the finge rs of his left hand. Finally, he raised his right hand and use d it as if to check whether his collar was still open. Then he lit his cigarette , and sat quite still again. He smoke d the cigarette down to its end, then abruptly let one foot over the side of the chair, ste pped on the cigare tte, got to his fee t, and made his way, rather quickly, out of the aisle. Using the forwardship stairway, he desce nde d fairly briskly to the Promenade Deck. Without stopping the re, he continued on down, still quite rapidly, to Main Deck. Then to A Deck. Then to B Deck. Then to C Deck. Then to D De ck. At D De ck the forwardship stairway e nded, and Nicholson stood for a moment, apparently at some loss for dire ction. However, he spotted someone who looked able to guide him. Halfway down the passageway, a stewarde ss was sitting on a chair outside a galle yway, reading a magazine and smoking a cigare tte. Nicholson went down to her, consulted her briefly, thanked her, then took a few additional ste ps forwardship and

[ 81 ]


NINE STORIES ­ J. D. Salinger opene d a heavy metal door that read: TO THE POOL . It ope ned onto a narrow, uncarpete d staircase . He was little more than halfway down the staircase when he heard an all-piercing, sustained scream--clearly coming from a small, female child. It was highly acoustical, as though it we re reverberating within four tile d walls.

[ 82 ]


